===== PAGE 1 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123
DOI10.1007/s11116-011-9320-6
A review on travel behaviour modelling in dynamic
traffic simulation models for evacuations
Adam J. Pel • Michiel C. J. Bliemer • Serge P. Hoogendoorn
Publishedonline:28January2011
(cid:2)TheAuthor(s)2011.ThisarticleispublishedwithopenaccessatSpringerlink.com
Abstract Dynamic traffic simulation models are frequently used to support decisions
when planning an evacuation. This contribution reviews the different (mathematical)
model formulations underlying these traffic simulation models used in evacuation studies
and the behavioural assumptions that are made. The appropriateness of these behavioural
assumptions is elaborated on in light of the current consensus on evacuation travel
behaviour, based on the view from the social sciences as well as empirical studies on
evacuation behaviour. The focus lies on how travellers’ decisions are predicted through
simulationregardingthechoicetoevacuate,departuretimechoice,destinationchoice,and
routechoice.Fortheevacuationparticipationanddeparturetimechoiceweargueinfavour
ofthesimultaneousapproachtodynamicevacuationdemandpredictionusingtherepeated
binarylogitmodel.Forthe destinationchoice weshowhowfurtherresearchisneededto
generalizethecurrentpreliminaryfindingsonthelocation-typespecificdestinationchoice
models.Fortheevacuationroutechoiceweargueinfavourofhybridroutechoicemodels
that enable both following instructed routes and en-route switches. Within each of these
discussions, we point at current limitations and make corresponding suggestions on
promising future research directions.
Keywords Evacuation(cid:2)Travelbehaviour(cid:2)Departuretimechoice(cid:2)Destinationchoice(cid:2)
Route choice (cid:2) Dynamic traffic simulation
A.J.Pel(&)(cid:2)M.C.J.Bliemer(cid:2)S.P.Hoogendoorn
DepartmentofTransportandPlanning,FacultyofCivilEngineeringandGeosciences,
DelftUniversityofTechnology,P.O.Box5048,2600GADelft,TheNetherlands
e-mail:a.j.pel@tudelft.nl
M.C.J.Bliemer
e-mail:m.c.j.bliemer@tudelft.nl
S.P.Hoogendoorn
e-mail:s.p.hoogendoorn@tudelft.nl
123

===== PAGE 2 =====

98 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
Introduction
Society is forced to deal with many natural and man-made disasters. These hurricanes,
wildfires, floods, large storms, mudflows, terrorist attacks, chemical spills, industrial
accidents,andmanysimilarhazardscausemassiveeconomicandsocialdamageaswellas
lossofliveseveryyear.Studies,suchasthosebyHooke(2000)andNewkirk(2001),show
that the frequency and intensity of natural disasters has been increasing over the past
decades. Furthermore, other studies, such as those by Plowman (2001) and Barrett et al.
(2000), argue that due to the population and urban development growingfaster than road
infrastructurecapacity,massevacuationswillbecomeincreasinglymoredifficultandtime
consuming. This underlines the importance for hazard prone regions to invest in efficient
disaster management strategies. Such strategies can focus on avoidance, where precau-
tionary measures reduce the probability of such disasters (e.g., reinforcing dams, raising
dikes, clearing fire control lines), or mitigation, where responsive measures reduce the
impact of such disasters (e.g., evacuation). Lave et al. (1990) uses explicit cost-benefit
analysestoshowthattheresponsiveoptionofevacuationallowspreservingpeoples’lives
at much lower costs. Nevertheless, in a later study (Lave and Apt 2006) it is argued that
authorities might be reluctant to actually order an evacuation when warranted due to the
uncertainty, lack of experience, and fear of financial liability involved in the process of
evacuation.
Thesuccessofanevacuationstronglydependsonmanyfactors,suchaswarningtime,
response time, information and instructions dissemination procedure, evacuation routes,
traffic flow conditions, dynamic traffic control measures, etc. (Dash and Gladwin 2007;
Lindell and Prater 2007). Given the complexity of the underlying processes and the
multitude of factorsinfluencing these procedures, trafficsimulation modelsare helpfulor
even indispensible for the analysis and planning of emergency evacuations (Barrett et al.
2000;Hardyetal.2010).Thesetrafficsimulationmodelscanbeappliedtoobtainabetter
understandingoftheevacuationconditionsandtheeffectoftrafficregulationsandcontrol
measureshereon,bypredictingdepartureandarrivalpatterns,traveltimes,averagespeeds,
queuelengths,trafficflowrates,etc.Insightintothisdynamicprocessisnecessarytomake
founded decisions on, for instance, the latest possible time to start evacuation, the best
evacuation routes, or the most suitable traffic management measures.
This contribution elaborates on the different (mathematical) model formulations
underlyingthese trafficsimulationmodelsused inevacuationstudies andthebehavioural
assumptionsthataremade.Welookatboth(commercial)trafficsimulationmodelsusedin
evacuation studies as well as evacuation research and proposed model formulations. The
focus lies on how travellers’ decisions regarding the choice to evacuate, departure time
choice, destination choice and route choice are modelled. Hence, this review article is
complementarytootherstate-of-the-artreviewarticlesonaspectssuchashowthesetraffic
simulation models are used to evaluate and design optimal evacuation instructions and
management strategies (e.g., Yusoff et al. 2008; Abdelgawad and Abdulhai 2009), the
issuesthatmustbedealtwithonceimplementingtheseevacuationplansinpractice(e.g.,
Wolshonetal.2005a,b),thedatarequirementstomanageandmodelemergencysituations
(e.g., Wilmot et al. 2009; Henson et al. 2009), and driving behaviour under adverse
conditions(e.g.,Hoogendoorn2010).Intheensuingdiscussionweconsiderthecarasthe
mainmodeoftransportforevacuation.Inthisview,thisreviewarticleiscomplementaryto
other state-of-the-art review articles on other modalities of transport, for instance, pedes-
trian evacuation research (e.g., Schadschneider et al. 2008). Many of the evacuation
modellingandsimulationissuesrelatingtocartravelbehaviouralsorelatetoevacuationby
123

===== PAGE 3 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 99
Fig.1 Frameworkevacuationtrafficsimulationmodelandoutlinearticle
public and organized transport, as well as multimodal evacuation. However, these modes
of transport will not be discussed explicitly.
Figure 1showstheframeworkofatypicaldynamictrafficsimulationmodelthatcanbe
usedinevacuationstudies.Here,theblackboxesontheleft-handsiderepresentthemodel
components:dynamictraveldemandmodel,dynamictripdistributionmodel,anddynamic
traffic assignment model. The white boxes on the right-hand side indicate the behaviour
that is described by each of these model components: evacuation participation and
departure time choice, destination choice, and route choice. The outline of the article
followsthismodelframeworkasfollows.Westartwithgivinganoverviewofthehistory
ofevacuationsimulationmodelsandthecurrentstateofthepracticein‘‘Pastandcurrent
evacuation traffic simulation models’’ section. After that, we discuss in ‘‘Traveller
behaviour under evacuation conditions’’ section, the current view on travellers’ choice
behaviourincaseofevacuation,makingreferencetobothanumberofempiricalstudieson
evacuationbehaviouraswellasinsightsfromthebehaviouralsciencesrelatedtodecision
making under emergency conditions. Then sections ‘‘Travel demand modelling’’, ‘‘Trip
distribution modelling’’ and ‘‘Traffic assignment modelling’’ form the main body of this
article, elaborating on the (implicit) assumptions regarding traveller behaviour that are
generallymadeinevacuationtrafficsimulationmodelsorproposedmodelformulations—
including those models discussed in ‘‘Past and current evacuation traffic simulation
models’’—in light of the view presented in ‘‘Traveller behaviour under evacuation con-
ditions’’ section. More precisely, we discuss travel demand modelling (i.e., travellers’
evacuation and departure time choice decisions) in ‘‘Travel demand modelling’’ section.
We discuss trip distribution modelling (i.e., travellers’ destination choice decisions) in
‘‘Trip distribution modelling’’ section. And we discuss traffic assignment modelling (i.e.,
travellers’ route choice decisions) in ‘‘Traffic assignment modelling’’ section. Each of
these sections ends with a critical discussion on current practices and promising future
research directions. The final section then gives a concluding discussion on the main
findings and makes some final remarks.
Past and current evacuation traffic simulation models
Inthelate1970s,anumberofsimulationmodelsweredevelopedtoanalyzeandevaluate
emergency evacuation plans. Early studies in the 1980s focused mainly on evacuation in
123

===== PAGE 4 =====

100 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
case of nuclear power plant emergency due to the Three Mile Island reactor incident in
1979.Then,afteranumberofextremelydevastatinghurricaneshittingthecoastlineofthe
U.S. in the 1990s, much evacuation modelling research shifted focus to hurricane evac-
uation. Since the September 11, 2001, incident in the U.S., also mass evacuation due to
terrorist attacks is getting more attention. Due to tsunamis in China and wildfires in
Australiaoverthepastyears,evacuationresearchinthesecountriesfocusonthesetypesof
evacuation. For the Dutch situation, rising sea levels and a perceived increasing threat of
floodinghasledtothestartofanationalprograminitiatingfloodevacuationresearchand
applications within the Netherlands.
Inmanyoftheearlystudies,evacuationisrecognizedasanexceptionaleventregarding
different travel demand patterns, driver behaviour, traffic management, etc., resulting in
newtrafficmodelsbeingdevelopedspecificallyforevacuationstudies.Afewexamplesare
NETVAC (Sheffi et al. 1980), DYNEV (KLD 1984), MASSVAC (Hobeika and Jamei
1985; Hobeika and Kim 1998), TEDSS (Sherali et al. 1991), IMDAS (Franzese and Han
2001), OREMS (Rathi and Solanki 1993), and CEMPS (Pidd et al. 1993). Some basic
modelcharacteristicsandapplicationsofthesemodelsarelistedinTable 1.Anotecanbe
made here that TEDSS is set up as a decision support system based on the simulation
modelMASSVAC,whichinturncanbeseenasasuccessorofNETVAC.AndOREMSis
based on the microscopic traffic simulation model CORSIM, which is developed for
regular day-to-day traffic conditions. These early simulation models are typically devel-
opedandcustomizedfortheevacuationofspecificregionsinresponsetoaspecifictypeof
hazard. For instance, NETVAC is designed to plan evacuation in response to a nuclear
power plant accident and therefore models the evacuation of all inhabitants from a pre-
determined area (10 miles radius from plant site) in radial outward direction, while
MASSVACisdevelopedforhurricaneevacuationofaruralareaandrequires evacuation
routes as model input from all origin locations to all safe destinations, where the origins
anddestinationsdependontheprojectedpathofthehurricane.Adistinguishingfeatureof
DYNEV which is worth mentioning is that it is the only model listed in Table 1 where
multimodalevacuationcanbesimulated,althoughinalimitedform.Carandbustransport
are incorporated, where bus services are modelled explicitly by route, schedule, and stop
locations.Earliermodelsthathavealsobeenappliedmorerecentlyandonreasonablylarge
scaleareDYNEV(e.g.,Goldblatt2004;Wolshonetal.2005a)andOREMS(e.g.,Hanand
Yuan 2005; Li et al. 2006; ORNL 2002).
More recently, a large number of evacuation studies are conducted using well-estab-
lished dynamic traffic simulation models developed for regular day-to-day traffic
Table1 Earlyevacuationtrafficsimulationmodelsandtheircharacteristicsandapplications
Model Trafficrepresentation Timedimension Application
Micro Macro Static Dynamic Offline Online
NETVAC x x x
DYNEV x x x
MASSVAC x x x
TEDSS x x x
IMDAS x x x
OREMS x x x
CEMPS x x x
123

===== PAGE 5 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 101
applications,includingbothmicroscopicmodels,suchasPARAMICS(CovaandJohnson
2003), CORSIM (Williams et al. 2007), VISSIM (Han and Yuan 2005), and INTEGRA-
TION (Mitchell and Radwan 2006), and mesoscopic or macroscopic models, such as
DYNASMART (Murray-Tuite 2007), DynaMIT (Balakrishna et al. 2008), DynusT (Noh
etal.2009),TransCAD(Wangetal.2010),andINDY(Klunderetal.2009).Inanumber
ofstudiesusingmicroscopicmodels,modelparametersdescribingdrivingbehaviour(such
as headway, acceleration, reaction time) have been adjusted for the case of emergency
evacuation (e.g., Tu et al. 2010). Other than that, the model structure and parameter
settings are typically not changed.
In all these models the origin–destination travel demand is either model input or is
computedusingagravity-modelbasedtripdistributionmodel,oracombinationofthetwo.
The departure times are generally determined by applying an exogenous response curve
statingthepercentageofdeparturesineachtimeinterval.Sucharesponsecurvehasbeen
assumedtofollowanumberofdifferentdistributions (e.g.,Uniformdistribution,Poisson
distribution, and Weibull distribution). A user-defined dynamic origin–destination matrix
allowsevaluating(mandatory)evacuationinstructionsregardingdedicateddeparturetime
windows and destinations.
These trips are then in most models assigned to the road network according to the
(dynamic or static) user-equilibrium assignment assumption, where one may wonder
whetheranequilibriumassumptionwillholdinanemergencyevacuation.Exceptionsare
the few models (OREMS, MASSVAC, and VISSIM) where user-defined routes can be
model input, thus allowing evaluating (mandatory) instructions regarding prescribed
evacuation routes. Other exceptions are the route choice models incorporated in INTE-
GRATION and DYNASMART allowing en-route route switching based on prevailing
traffic conditions.
In most models, traffic flow is simulated in which road network characteristics are
mostlystatic.Insomemodelsroadnetworkcharacteristicssuchascapacityandmaximum
speedvarytoincorporatethedamagingeffectofthehazardontheroadinfrastructure(e.g.,
links becoming less accessible due to flooding) and dynamic traffic management and
controlmeasures(e.g.,contraflowoperationstoincreaseoutboundcapacity).Forexample,
MASSVAC allows modelling several consecutive time intervals (time-sliced static traffic
assignment) in which road network characteristics change, and INDY incorporates so-
called ‘events’ in which network characteristics and model parameters can vary in time.
A final addition to this overview of prior and current evacuation traffic models is the
development of decision support systems and traffic information systems which are inte-
grated with a dynamic traffic simulation model. For instance, the Evacuation Traffic
Information System ETIS (PBS&J 2000a) is set up as a web-based monitoring tool for
collection and distribution of traffic information during the process of evacuation. ETIS
usesreal-timeinformationfromdifferentsourceson,forexample,evacuationparticipation
rates,trafficmanagementandcontrolmeasures,prevailingtrafficconditions,andweather
conditions.Thetoolthenpredictstrafficconditionsforashorttimeaheadbasedonhistoric
evacuation data, and evaluates the effect of applying traffic control measures such as
contraflowandlaneclosures.ETIShasbeenappliedinpracticeinthesoutheasternstates
oftheUnitedStates,includingNorthCarolina,SouthCarolina,Georgia,andFlorida,and
later also Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas (Wolshon et al. 2005a).
We should remark here that this overview of past and current evacuation traffic sim-
ulation models does not aim to be complete, but to provide a framework of the current
practices in traffic simulation models used in many evacuation studies. Here we only
discussed the more ‘full fledged’ traffic simulation models. A number of interesting
123

===== PAGE 6 =====

102 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
proposed model formulations in evacuation research will be introduced and discussed in
‘‘Travel demand modelling’’, ‘‘Trip distribution modelling’’ and ‘‘Traffic assignment
modelling’’ sections when we elaborate on the individual model components of a typical
evacuation traffic simulation model.
Traveller behaviour under evacuation conditions
Themodelsintroducedintheprevioussectionaimtosimulatetrafficconditionsonaroad
network in case of evacuation. They thereby unavoidably make assumptions on how
travellersmaybehaveinthesetypesofconditions.Toallowustoinvestigatethesuitability
of these behavioural assumptions in the following sections, we will here discuss the
viewpointofthebehaviouralsciencesonevacuationtravelchoicebehaviourandshowhow
empirical studies on evacuation behaviour underline or question this view.
Before discussing the psycho-behavioural research and empirics on evacuation
behaviour,twonotescanbemadehere.Firstofall,thereexistsquiteanextensiveamount
ofliteratureinthefieldofbehaviouralsciencesrelatingtohumans’psychologicalresponse
to, for example, (imminent) emergency conditions, and decision making under time-
pressureandsafetyconcerns(foranoverviewseeCourtetal.2004;Dombroskietal.2006;
Mawson 2005). This kind of research has found almost no reference in evacuation traffic
modellingandsimulationstudies.Thismightbepartlyduetoitsoftennon-quantitativeor
experimentalsetup.Secondof all,remarkablyenough,incontrasttonetworkevacuation
modelling, in crowd evacuation modelling, surprisingly many simulation models attempt
toincorporatemorerealistichumanbehaviour.Thisisdonebyextendingthesepedestrian
simulation models to more sophisticated agent frameworks. For instance, applying cog-
nitive-behavioural frameworks to model individuals’ behaviour under specific conditions
(e.g., the so-called belief-desire-intension framework is often applied), or different struc-
tures are built-into model leadership and herding behaviour, or travellers’ information
acquisition and exchange is modelled to include possible unfamiliarity and learning
characteristics (see e.g., Murakami et al. 2002; Pelechano et al. 2005; Pelechano and
Badler 2006; Shendarkar et al. 2006).
Psycho-behavioural research and empirics on evacuation behaviour
A large number of real life emergency situations collected and discussed by Quarantelli
(1957)andLeachandCampling(1982)indicatethatthebehaviouralresponseofpeopleis
remarkably consistent across different types of disastrous conditions. This structural pat-
tern is divided into a number of temporal phases showing how behavioural responses
change over time as the emergency conditions develop, summarized in Fig. 2. These
phases range from pre-impact when an emergency is becoming probable to post-impact
Fig.2 Phasesinemergencyconditionsandtheirmostprevalentbehaviouralresponses(fromHoogendoorn
etal.2009,basedonLeachandCampling1982)
123

===== PAGE 7 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 103
whentheemergencyhaspassed.Equivalentmodelshavebeenproposedby,forexample,
Glass (1959) and Tyhurst (1951). The main value of this framework isthat each phase is
accompaniedbyaspecificbehaviouralresponsewhichisfoundtobethenpredominantly
prevailing.
An equivalent dynamic approach focusing on the individual decision-making task
states, that individuals experience a number of (quasi-)consecutive psycho-behavioural
phases.Thedecision-makingtaskstartswithinformationacquisition,followedbysituation
assessment, and finally action execution (first posed by Woodworth 1958). Since indi-
viduals cannot assess all available information, the first two phases are undertaken
simultaneously(Baddeley1972;Wickens1987).Informationisfilteredbasedonrelevance
and trustworthiness according to how the current situation is perceived. This filtering
processmakesthetaskeasier,howevermaydelayacceptingandappropriatelyresponding
to changing conditions. This can be explained through the phenomenon of cognitive dis-
sonance.Forexample,whenpeopleperceivethemselvesassafeyetreceiveinformationon
a possible threat, then the logical inconsistency in these beliefs is (initially) resolved by
rejecting or ignoring this warning information. A large number of real life examples are
discussed by Leach and Campling (1982) where people in danger choose to ignore the
possibility of the disaster despite the warnings prior to the disaster. In all cases, the
conflicting information is discarded as being not relevant or untrustworthy.
Thispatternofbehaviourisresembledbythefindingsinanumberofempiricalstudies
specifictoevacuation.Forinstance,Miletietal.(1975)reportsthatthemoreinformation
theinitialwarningcontains,themorelikelyitisthatpeoplerespond.And,whenwarnings
are heard and believed, then evacuation is the end result. This is also underlined by the
findingsofBaker(1991).Twenty-sixpost-hurricanesurveysintheperiod1961till1989in
the US indicated that next to factors such as risk level, public instructions, housing type,
andstormthreat,thepersonalriskperceptionwasmostprominentinthedecisionwhether
toevacuate.SimilarlyforthecaseofcyclonesinAustralia,Raggattetal.(1993)foundthat
peoplewithlesswarningtimeweremorelikelytodenytheirpersonalriskandresideina
general feeling of complacency. De Jong and Helsloot (2010) report on the results from
surveys held during a Dutch national exercise on flood evacuation. In this study, a large
share of people (48–66%) remains unaware of the actual risk while warning is given and
voluntaryevacuationisadvised.Atthesametime,thecredibilityoftheinformationthatis
givenisdeemedlowbythemajority(52–88%).Averyinformativediscussiononthistopic
isgivenbyDashandGladwin(2007).Oneoftheirstatementsisthatitistheperceptionof
riskthatmotivatespeopletoevacuate,notthehearingofwarningsandevacuationorders.
This is implied by the psycho-behavioural frameworks constructed in the behavioural
sciences, as well as a strikingly common finding in many empirical studies.
Oncethedangerisrecognizedandpeoplestartresponding,theirinformationprocessing
and decision making capabilities might be limited due to mentally demanding circum-
stances,associatedwithanxietyand(theperceptionof)time-pressure.Wills(1998)argues
thatinthesesituationspeoplerelymoreoninstinctsandexperience,therebyavoidingthe
timeneededformakingrationallythought-overdecisions.LeachandCampling(1982)and
SchmidtandWarner(2002)foundevidenceforthisbyshowingthatpeopletypicallytend
to remain calm, and only once they perceive inescapability do they express behaviour
whichcanbeseenasirrationalandhabitual(notethattoexpresshabitualbehaviourunder
disaster conditions, for instance, for the case of exit choice, can be seen as irrational or
illogical).Leach andCampling (1982) furtherargue that duringthe impact phasethere is
evidenceofacleardistinctionbetweenthepsycho-behaviouralresponsesofthreetypesof
individuals. Once people undertake action in the impact phase, people may remain calm
123

===== PAGE 8 =====

104 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
andrational,maybestunnedbythesituationandreactinasemiautomaticmanner,ormay
mentally breakdown and react uncontrolled and inappropriately. It is found that in most
cases approximately 75% of the individuals express the second type of behaviour, while
the behaviour of the remaining share corresponds evenly with the first and third type. It
shouldbenotedthatalthoughtheappearance ofegocentricbehaviouriswidelyaccepted,
especially panicking behaviour has been shown to be quite an uncommon reaction to an
emergency situation (Aguirre 2005; Blake et al. 2004; Bohannon 2005; Cornwell 2003;
Mawson 2005).
A number of empirical studies on evacuation behaviour show a slightly different pat-
tern.Thismighthavetodowiththefactthatthecircumstances(duringtheimpactphase)
whichthesepsycho-behaviouralconstructsarebasedonaremoreimminentthantypically
seen (or perceived) in these empirical evacuation studies. The surveys by De Jong and
Helsloot(2010)intheDutchfloodexerciseshowthatoncetheactualdikebreachandflood
occur,theneedforinformationonaspectsastheexpectedfloodingarea,waterheight,and
possiblegovernmentaidintheevacuationincreased.Withanumberofpeople,thislackof
information impaired them on making a decision whether to evacuate. Those people that
dodecidetoevacuateshowasimilarprominentneedforinformation.Thisneedfortraffic
informationonappropriateevacuationroutesisreported,forexample,byDowandCutter
(2000)andLindelletal.(2005)afterconductingpost-hurricanesurveysandbyRobinson
and Khattak (2010) based on stated preference surveys. In cases where this traffic infor-
mation is not available, travellers might be impaired in their route decisions. Dow and
Cutter(2002)heldasurveyamongSouthCarolinaresidentsafterhurricaneFloyd.Oneof
theirfindingswasthat,despitethecongestiononthemainegressroutes,travellersdidnot
switchtoalternativeroutesusingruralroads.Theauthorssuggestthatthismighthavebeen
due to travellers’ uncertainty that alternative (rural) routes would not provide breakdown
services and cell phone coverage. Likewise, Lindell and Prater (2006) report that for the
case of hurricane Katrina, travellers relied slightly more on past familiarity with the
evacuation route than on prevailing traffic conditions, likely due to the lack of traffic
information.
The last phase of recoil and rescue (see Fig. 2) will not be discussed here since the
evacuation is most likely to have ended by then.
Discussion
Theaboveperspectiveonevacuationtravelbehaviourshowsthatanumberoffactorsplay
an important role in determining the travel decisions of individuals. In sum, individuals
reactaccordingtohowtheyperceivethechangingsituation.Theytherebyrespondtoboth
the hazard’s evolution in space and time, as well as the dynamic traffic (management)
conditions, possibly with some delay. This explains the evacuees’ need for information.
That people do not automatically follow the advice and orders from public officials, but
tend to seek information, assess their personal risk, and make independent evacuation
decisions, is supported by a substantial number of empirical studies (e.g., Baker 1991,
1995; Dash and Morrow 2001; De Jong and Helsloot 2010; Dow and Cutter 1998, 2000;
Knowles 2003; Rasid et al. 2000). It is therefore essential that dynamic traffic simulation
models that aim to simulate an evacuation include this reactive traveller behaviour,
therewith incorporating the important role of time-varying disaster conditions, (traffic)
information, and warnings, discretionary advice and evacuation orders.
We should remark here that, as in ‘‘Past and current evacuation traffic simulation
models’’section,thisoverviewofsocio-psychologicalresearchandempiricsonevacuation
123

===== PAGE 9 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 105
behaviourattemptsinnowaytogiveacompletediscussiononall(empirical)researchon
evacuation behaviour. Instead we wish to provide a background of the current consensus
on evacuation behaviour. This background is needed in the following sections when dis-
cussingthesuitabilityofthe(mathematical)modelformulationsthatareproposedandused
to simulate traveller behaviour under evacuation conditions.
Travel demand modelling
Travel demand models predict the number of people who will evacuate and when these
people will depart. In other words, these models describe the decisions of travellers
regardingevacuationparticipationanddeparturetime.Thesedecisionsaregenerallymade
atthehouseholdlevel(DashandGladwin2007;DowandCutter2000;Heathetal.2001;
Whiteheadetal.2000).Wewillinthefollowingdiscussionhowevernotconsideratwhich
level the decision is made, but how the resulting evacuation participation rates and
departure time patterns are simulated.
Acommonlyusedapproachtodynamictraveldemandmodellingistodosointwoor
three consecutive steps. Logically, the first step is to identify the region that needs to be
evacuated. The first step of establishing the region that will evacuate or needs to be
evacuated is often done by expert judgment going by the hazard scenario characteristics.
For hurricane evacuations, this procedure is formalized by Wilmot and Meduri (2005)
using hurricane attributes such as the track, speed, and size to identify evacuation zones.
Easilyidentifiablezones(bye.g.ZIPcodeandlandmarks)arethenassignedaspecificrisk
and are expected to evacuate in case of specific scenarios. Here, regions above the max-
imumsurgefloodlimitarenotconsidered.However,evidently,alsoareaswhichareinfact
notatriskmaystartevacuating(shadowevacuation).Especiallyconsideringthefindingsin
theprevioussectionthatevacuationisprimarilymotivatedbypeople’sperceptionofbeing
at risk. Durham (2007) points out that this may particularly happen during mass evacua-
tions and it would lead to larger travel demand thus hindering those in real need to
evacuate.
After the first step is undertaken and the evacuation region is identified, the share of
peoplethatwillparticipateintheevacuationispredicted,aswellastheirdeparturetimes.
Herein, we distinguish two approaches based on whether the participation and departure
time choices are modelled as sequential decisions (‘‘Sequential travel demand model’’
section) or conducted simultaneously (‘‘Simultaneous travel demand model’’ section).
Sequential travel demand model
In the sequential approach, once the evacuation region is identified, the second step in
predictingtraveldemandistopredicttheshareofpeoplewhowillevacuate.Forthecase
ofhurricanes,Baker(1991)listedfiveattributesdeterminingthedecisiontoevacuate:the
risklevelwithinthearea,actionsbypublicauthorities,typeofhousing,priorperceptionof
personalrisk,andastormspecificthreatfactor.Inthepast,theseattributeshaveservedfor
an empirically based approach to predict evacuation demand by Tweedie et al. (1986).
Later,PBS&J(2000b)developedacross-classificationtypeoftripgenerationmodelbased
on survey data collected in the south-eastern states of the US where the evacuation par-
ticipation specified by county depended on the hurricane category and speed, tourist
occupancy, and type of housing in that area. The performance of this behaviour-based
modelwastestedagainstanumberofdata-drivenmodels,namelylogisticalregressionand
123

===== PAGE 10 =====

106 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
Fig.3 Evacuationresponse
curvefollowingWeibull
distributionfordifferent
parametersettings:dashedgraph
b=0.135,c=2.55;dash-
dottedgraphb=0.085,
c=3.05;solidgraphb=0.085,
c=2.55;longdash-dottedgraph
b=0.085,c=2.05;long
dashedgraphb=0.035,
c=2.55
variousformsofneuralnetworkmodels,byWilmotandMei(2003)onadatasetcollected
in south-west Louisiana following hurricane Andrew. The findings showed that the data-
driven models (particularly a feedforward neural network structure) were better able to
predicttheobservedparticipationrate.Thedrawbacksofthesetypesofmodels(especially
neuralnetworks)are,however,thattheyrequirespecificdataforcalibrationandtheresults
are typically not transferable toother settings. Thiswhile behaviour-based modelsdo not
havethesedrawbacksandprovidemoreinsightintotheevacuationparticipationbehaviour
of people.
The third step to predict the dynamic travel demand is to model travellers’ departure
time choice. This is often done by applying an exogenous response curve stating the
percentage of departures in each time interval. Since some origins will be earlier under
threat than others, such a response curve istypically predicted for each origin separately.
The departure response curve has been assumed to follow many different distributions.
Someexamplesareinstantaneousdeparture(Lewis2001;ChenandZhan2004;Chiuetal.
2006), a Uniform distribution (Liu et al. 2006; Yuan et al. 2006), a Rayleigh distribution
(Tweedie et al. 1986), a Poisson distribution (Cova and Johnson 2002), a Weibull distri-
bution (Jonkman 2007; Lindell 2008) or sigmoid curve (Kalafatas and Peeta 2009;
Xie et al. 2010). The Weibull distribution and sigmoid curve are most often used and
claimed to be most realistic. The Weibull distribution is given by
DðtÞ¼1(cid:3)expð(cid:3)btcÞ ð1Þ
whereD(t)isthecumulativepercentageofpeoplewhohaveevacuateduntiltimeinstantt.
Theshapeofthedistributionisdeterminedbytwoparameters,bandc.Theeffectofthese
parameters is shown in Fig. 3. Higher values for b and c lead to a faster response, while
lower values represent a slower response. The sigmoid curve is given by
DðtÞ¼ð1þexp½(cid:3)aðt(cid:3)hÞ(cid:4)Þ(cid:3)1 ð2Þ
The shape of the curve is determinedby two parameters, aand h. Theeffect hereof is
more distinguishable and allows behavioural interpretation (Fig. 4). The response rate a
setstheslopeofthecurve,suchthatlowvaluesproduceamoreuniformdepartureprofile
(slower response). The half loading time hsets the midpoint of the curve, and thus states
thetimeatwhichhalfofthetotalnumberoftravellershavedeparted.Sensitivityanalyses
ontheseparametersdonebyOzbayandYazici(2006)andPeletal.(2010b)concludethat
advancing or postponing the half loading time h clearly has no impact on the evacuation
process since travellers departat the same rate and thusqueue lengthsandaverage travel
timesareequalforallcases(unlessroadnetworkcharacteristicsarestochasticortheroad
123

===== PAGE 11 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 107
Fig.4 Evacuationresponse
curvefollowingsigmoidcurve
fordifferentparametersettings:
longdashedgrapha=2.5,
h=2.5;longdash-dottedgraph
a=1.5,h=4;solidgraph
a=2.5,h=4;dash-dotted
grapha=3.5,h=4;dashed
grapha=2.5,h=5.5
network is not fully available throughout the duration of the evacuation). On the other
hand, the response rate a has a substantial non-linear impact on the evacuation traffic
conditions andarrival pattern, especially whenthe network loadisrelatively high(which
can be expected during evacuation conditions). The reason is that a higher response rate
leads to more traffic on the road network which results in more congested traffic condi-
tions. These worse traffic conditions lead to lower network performance (measured by,
e.g.,trafficflowandarrivalrates),whichinturnfurtherdeterioratenetworkperformance.
Thispositivefeedbackloopimpliesthatahigherresponseratedoesnotguaranteeafaster
evacuation; it may even be slower. This underlines the importance of estimating the
appropriate parameters when using these models applying an exogenous response curve.
The sequential approach discussed above is applied most often. Ozbay and Yazici
(2006) reason that this is due to the mathematical simplicity of the approach and the fact
thatrelativelylittlesituation-specificdataisrequired.Modelattributesandparametersare
usually estimated based on expert judgment or past evacuation data. However, the draw-
back of this sequential approach (and particularly the response curves) is that there is no
clearbehaviouralbasistojustifythemethodonastheresponsecurvesareexogenousinput
insteadofendogenouslydeterminedbythethreat/hazardwithinthemodel.Itisdifficult,if
not impossible, to incorporate the findings on the important (socio-psychological and
circumstantial) factors determining individuals’ evacuation decision as discussed in
‘‘Traveller behaviourunderevacuationconditions’’section.ThisisalsounderlinedbyFu
(2004) pointing out that response curves are typically constructed for short-lasting evac-
uations(uptillseveralhours,whilemanyevacuationsmaylastforseveraldays),time-of-
day variations are not included (the sigmoid curve does not allow incorporating the
behaviouraleffectofday/nighttimeonthedeparturetimeswhichareobservedinreal-life),
hazardspecificdynamicsknowntoinfluencethetraveldemandarenotincluded(e.g.,the
speed,intensityandtrackofahurricaneorwildfireinappropriatelyhavenoeffectontravel
demand), and the effect of an evacuation plan cannot be realistically assessed (since the
impact of the evacuation order is not addressed).
Simultaneous travel demand model
Another approach relaxing many of these limitations is to execute these steps (i.e., pre-
dictingtripgenerationanddeparturetime)simultaneouslyasanendogenousprocess.The
dynamic travel demand is modelled by applying a repeated binary logit model where we
repeatedlyintimepredicttheshareofpeoplewhodecidetoevacuateanddepartpresently,
orpostponethedecisiontoevacuate,seeFig. 5.Thedecisiontoevacuate,modelledbythis
123

===== PAGE 12 =====

108 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
Fig.5 Conceptualframework
repeatedbinarylogitmodel
binary logit model, is based on the differential utility associated with evacuating (com-
paredtonotevacuating)basedonthe(subjectivelyperceived)prevailingconditions,such
as the proximity of the hazard. This is given by
DðtÞ¼maxð1þexp½(cid:3)lVðt0Þ(cid:4)Þ(cid:3)1 ð3Þ
t0(cid:5)t
where D(t) is the cumulative share of all people who have evacuated until time instant
t.Thisdependsontherelativeutilitytoevacuatecomparedtothealternativeofpostponing
the decision, denoted by V(t). This relative evacuation utility is typically estimated as a
combinationoffactorsdeterminingtheattractivenessofevacuating.Examplesofpossible
factors which may influence the decision to evacuate (or not) are socio-demographic
characteristics (such as age, gender, household composition), spatio-temporal disaster
characteristics (such as wind speed, intensity, distance to hazard), the opportunity to
undertake property protection, whether neighbours evacuate, the presence of pets, prior
evacuation experiences, and whether an evacuation order is given. For a more complete
overviewofthemanydifferentfactorsthathavebeenreportedtodeterminetheevacuation
decision we refer to Carnegie and Deka (2010). Different people perceive these factors
differently and assign different importance to these factors. The effect of this variance is
modelled by the scale parameter l in Eq. 3, where a higher value suggests a smaller
variance among people.
Equation 3 maximizes over t0 B t since the cumulative share of evacuees is computed
anditisassumedthatpeopledonotreturnoncetheyhavedecidedtoevacuate.Therefore,
thecurrentshareofevacueesequalstheshareofpeoplewhowoulddecideonevacuating
given any of the previously prevailing conditions. Or in other words, it equals the maxi-
mum share of people who have decided to evacuate in any of the previous time instants
given the then prevailing utility to evacuate.
The performance of the repeated binary logit model depends evidently on how accu-
rately the relative evacuation utilities V(t) are estimated. Relative utility functions have
beenestimatedforthecaseofwildfires(Alsnihetal.2005)andhurricanes(FuandWilmot
2004; Fu et al. 2006) using both stated preference surveys and post-hurricane revealed
preference surveys. For the case of wildfire evacuation, Alsnih et al. (2005) selected a
number of attributes describing weather and wildfire conditions from literature and a
123

===== PAGE 13 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 109
pre-study focus group. Surveys were carried out with different combinations of attribute
levels. A multinomial logit model and mixed logit model were estimated based on the
collected stated choice experiment data identifying a number of statistically significant
factors: temperature, wind speed, wind direction, fire type, fire distance, and household
specific socio-demographic characteristics. Since the levels of these attributes are time-
dependent, the evacuation participation behaviour can be predicted dynamically as the
wildfire evolves. Remarkably, the parameter for the attribute modelling whether the
evacuation route was under threat of being cut off by the fire (originally included in
thesurvey)wasfoundtobestatisticallynotsignificant.Thissuggeststhatinthiscasethe
decisiontoevacuatewas madeindependentlyfrom theroutechoice decision.Thiswould
mean that the travel demand and traffic assignment can be modelled independently
(sequentially). Follow up research is needed to show whether this holds in more cases.
Forthecaseofhurricaneevacuation,FuandWilmot(2004)estimatedarepeatedbinary
logitmodelbasedon evacuationbehaviourdataforhurricaneAndrew.They identifiedas
beingstatisticallysignificant:thedistancetothestorm,theforwardspeedofthehurricane,
time-of-day (three periods were introduced using dummy variables: morning, afternoon,
andnight),thepresenceofanevacuationorder,possibilityofflooding,andhousingtype.
Later,Fuetal.(2006)estimatedthesamemodel(nowalsoincludinghurricanewindspeed
and time-to-landfall) for a dataset from hurricane Floyd in South Carolina and tested the
calibrated model on the hurricane Andrew data. The predicted dynamic travel demand
provedtobesimilartotheobservedtraveldemandsuggestingthetransferabilityofweights
to different sites and hurricane scenarios.
In the travel demand models discussed here where a possible evacuation order is
included, the impact of the order is typically modelled by estimating the change in
evacuationbehaviour(i.e.,theincreaseindeparturerate)directlyaftertheevacuationorder
is given. This may be appropriate when the order to evacuate immediately is given sud-
denly. However, more complex departure behaviour is likely to occur in case of a staged
evacuation where (groups of) travellers receive different designated departure time win-
dows in advance, where these instructed departure time windows follow from an evacu-
ationplansetuptomoderateevacuationflowsandavoidcongestion.Forinstance,people
may consider postponing their preferred departure time in order to comply. In order to
model this type of behaviour, Pel et al. (2008) proposes including a dynamic term in the
evacuation utility function. This factor could be the time difference with the instructed
departure time window, which decreases the relative utility of evacuating early, where
earlier time instants are associated with a larger disutility, while it increases the relative
utilityofevacuatinglate.Thelatterisjustifiedsincetheevacuationdecisionismodelledas
arepeateddecisionwhethertoevacuate,thusinorderto‘comply’oncethedeparturetime
window has passed people would have to evacuate belatedly. The compliance to the
designated time window is then determined by the corresponding weight in the utility
function.Thisweightmostlikelydependsonboththetraveller’swillingnesstocomplyas
wellasthelevelofenforcementconveyedbytheauthorityexecutingtheevacuationplan.
Forexample,instructionsdistributedthroughthemediamayleadtolowercompliancethan
instructions given directly by the police going door-to-door.
Discussion
Thesequentialandsimultaneousapproachesofpredictingtheevacuationparticipationrate
and departure time profile are both used. Generally speaking, the simultaneous approach
applyingtherepeatedbinarylogitmodelistypicallyusedinevacuationresearchfocusing
123

===== PAGE 14 =====

110 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
on predicting the dynamic travel demand under various evacuation conditions. As also
mentioned earlier, this might be due to the fact that it provides insight into the actual
decisions of evacuees. The sequential approach with a fixed participation rate and exog-
enous response curve is typically used in practice (including the traffic models used in
evacuation studies discussed in ‘‘Past and current evacuation traffic simulation models’’
section), and evacuation research focusing on other aspects than departure time choice
behaviour(e.g.,witha focusontraffic management).Asmentionedearlier, thismightbe
due to its simplicity. The sequential approach using logistical regression or a neural
network to predict travel demand has the drawbacks of both approaches. These methods
arebothnotsimpleinthesensethattheyrequireelaborateandspecificdata,aswellasdo
not provide as much insight into the traveller behaviour as the simultaneous approach.
Using neural networks here in particular seems of little value since these models are not
generalisable.
The sequential approach as modelled by PBS&J (2000a) using a cross-classification
model was compared with the repeated binary logit model by Fu and Wilmot (2007). As
expected, the binary logit model more closely models observed dynamic travel demand
behaviour(basedonadatasetcontainingevacuationbehaviourinsouthwestLouisianafor
hurricaneAndrew).Thereasonwhythisisexpectedisthattherepeatedbinarylogitmodel
has more flexibility (a higher number of parameters). Hence it is better capable of mod-
elling evacuation behaviour given that elaborate and specific data is available for cali-
bration. In other words, it better allows incorporating all insights on evacuation decision
making from the behavioural sciences and empirical studies discussed in ‘‘Traveller
behaviourunderevacuationconditions’’section.Wewouldliketoemphasizeanumberof
clear behavioural advantages to this approach pointed out by Fu and Wilmot (2007): the
model estimates how people dynamically respond to changing hazard conditions, road
network conditions, and evacuation instructions, the model provides insight into the
observedevacuationbehaviour,andtheresults(weightratios)appeartobeuptoacertain
level transferable to other sites and situations. Whether the latter advantage can be
generalizedneedstobeshownbyfutureresearch.Insum,therepeatedbinarylogitmodel
provides insight into trade-offs made in the decision to evacuate, resulting in travel
demandsthatonanaggregatedlevelaremoreorlessconsistentwiththeobservedchoices.
Thereby, given that it is well calibrated, it yields exactly the information that we need as
model input for our evacuation traffic simulation models.
Anotecanbemadehereonfutureresearchontherepeatedbinarylogitmodel.Current
practice is to use the prevailing conditions to estimate the dynamic differential utility to
evacuate (compared to not evacuating), as discussed earlier. There is good reason to
believe that people not only consider current conditions, but base their decision on the
predictedconditions.Thatis,theyalsodistinguishpatternsinchanginghazardconditions,
such as an increase in wind speed, a rising water level, a growing levee breach and
resultingincreaseinfloodingspeed,andanincreasingwildfireintensity.Similarly,people
may distinguish steady conditions from temporary fluctuations, for instance, a wind con-
tinuouslypushingthewildfiretowardstheindividualorhouseholdisperceiveddifferently
than a temporary change in wind direction (though having the same instantaneously pre-
vailingconditions).Hence,itmightproveworthwhiletoestimatethesemodelsnotonthe
dynamic prevailing conditions at the time instant that the decision is made, but on the
dynamicpredictedconditions.Asaproxyforthesepredictedconditions,therecently-past
conditionsthatleaduptothetimeinstantthatthedecisionismadecouldbeused.Clearly,
future research needs to show the possible benefit (regarding enhanced predictive power)
of this approach.
123

===== PAGE 15 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 111
To conclude, travel demand is typically predicted as the whole of single trips from
origin (often home or work location) to destination (either network exit point or final
refugelocation).Anumberofempiricalstudiessupporttheviewthathouseholdsevacuate
as a unit (e.g., Heath et al. 2001; Sime 1993; Zelinsky and Kosinski 1991). Hence, it is
implicitly assumed that evacuees belonging to a single household are either already all
togetheruponevacuationorevacuateindependentlyandmeetupafterarrivingoutsidethe
threatenedregion.ThisisrelaxedinworkbyMurray-TuiteandMahmassani(2003,2004).
Theyproposeanevacuationmodelformulationaccountingfortripchainsduetohousehold
interactions.Itissimulatedhowthecarlesshouseholdmembersarepickedupbytheother
householdmember(s)attheirschool,workorresidentiallocationtothencontinuetheirtrip
together.Incorporatingthishouseholdtripchainingprincipallyallowscapturingotherwise
unexplained evacuation travel patterns (such as longer trips and initially ‘evacuating’
towards the disaster area) and avoids too optimistic evacuation time predictions. Meeting
locations are currently arranged before evacuation, as well as are the carless household
membersassignedtodrivers.Theauthorspointoutthatfurtherresearchmayconsiderthe
impact of communication and traffic information provision on drivers switching pick-ups
and rerouting en-route, thus leading to a more efficient evacuation.
Trip distribution modelling
Tripdistributiondescribestheresultofindividuals’destinationchoice.Muchfewerstudies
areconductedonthischoicebehaviourthanonthepreviouslydiscussedparticipationand
departure time choice behaviour. Also, these studies all share a common approach. Gen-
erally speaking, this approach consists of two steps. The factors determining the type of
location that people evacuate to are identified first. Second, a (often gravity-based) trip
distribution model is used to relate these location type preferences to actual destination
choice. Each of these steps is discussed next.
Factors determining type of evacuation location
Asmallnumberofstudiesidentifythefactorswhichdeterminethetypeoflocationpeople
evacuate to. This is done using both stated preference and revealed preference data. For
instance, Whitehead et al. (2000) and Brodie et al. (2006) report that people with higher
incomeandeducationtendtoevacuatetowardshotelsandmotels,whilepeoplewithlower
income and education tend to evacuate to shelters, based on post-hurricane evacuation
data. Deka and Carnegie (2010) build on this by conducting a stated preference survey
relating socio-economic and demographic characteristics to the decision whether to
evacuatetoashelterlocationortoanon-shelterlocation,suchasfriendsorrelativesanda
hotelormotel.Theestimatedbinarylogitmodelsupportssimilarfindings.Theprobability
that a household evacuates to friends or relatives is modelled by Cuellar et al. (2009) in
their model for the US Golf coast by the likelihood that the household belongs to the
‘‘region’sdominantracialgroup’’.Whetherthiscanbegeneralizedtoothersettingscanbe
questioned.
Destination choice modelling
TheUSArmyCorpsofEngineers(1995),inaguidelineforhurricaneevacuationstudies,
suggeststhatevacueescanbeallocatedtodestinationsproportionallytothepopulationin
123

===== PAGE 16 =====

112 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
thispossible destination, weightedby a functionof the travel distance.Thisis essentially
thegravity-basedtripdistributionmodelwhichisappliedtopredicttheorigin–destination
matrices used as model input in all the traffic simulation models introduced in ‘‘Past and
current evacuation traffic simulation models’’ section.
In other studies, the different location types and accompanying different determining
factors as identified by Whitehead et al. (2000) and Brodie et al. (2006) are recognized.
For instance, Cuellar et al. (2009) compute attraction potentials per type of location. The
attractionforhotelsandmotelsisestimatedbasedontheaccommodationavailabilityanda
presumedaverageoccupancyrate.Whereastheattractionforsheltersisestimatedbasedon
thepresenceofschoolswithgymnasiawherethesesheltersareoftenconstructed.Location
typespecifictrippotentialsandtripattractionsarethencomputedandusedinthelocation
typespecificgravity-basedtripdistributionmodelstopredicttravellers’destinationchoice.
Similarly, Cheng (2007) used post-hurricane survey data to estimate a ‘friend/relative
trip distribution model’ and a ‘hotel/motel trip distribution model’. In this case, the
observedorigin–destinationmatrixwasreconstructedbasedonthesurveydataandthetrip
distributionmodelswereestimatedtoproducethebestfittingestimatedorigin–destination
matrix. The gravity-based trip distribution models were calibrated assuming that trip fre-
quencies are considered inversely proportional to the travel distance once outside the
threatened zone. Testing the trip length distribution as predicted by the calibrated trip
distributionmodelsagainstobservedtriplengthdistributionsgavegoodstatisticalresults.
However,littlebehaviouralinferencescanbemadefromsuchanapproach.Therefore,ina
later study (Cheng et al. 2008) the same data was used to estimate two multinomial logit
models. For the friend/relative model, it was found that, as expected, the parameters for
travel distance and the probability that the destination was at risk by the hurricane were
negative,indicatingthatadestinationatlargerdistanceandhigherriskislesslikelytobe
chosen.Factorshavingapositiveinfluenceonthedestinationchoiceoftravellerswerethe
destinationpopulation,whetherthedestinationisametropolitanarea,andthe‘‘percentage
of white population’’ at the destination. For the hotel/motel multinomial logit model the
factors travel distance, risk indicator, and white population percentage were also found,
withthesameeffect.Here,alsothenumberofhotelsatthedestinationandtheproximityto
theinterstatemotorwayhadapositiveeffect.Thestaticapproachinthisstudyisrelaxedin
a subsequent study by Cheng and Wilmot (2009) where time-dependent travel times are
included in a quasi-dynamic destination choice model. However, it should be remarked
that these time-dependent travel times were reconstructed using the TransCAD traffic
simulationmodelwhichcomputesaquasi-dynamicuserequilibriumassignmentbasedon
link travel times following the Bureau of Public Roads (BPR) function. The authors
themselves point out that this approach likely leads to wrong estimates on the prevailing
travel times, and suggest improving the destination choice model by applying a different
dynamic traffic assignment model.
Discussion
The available research on evacuation destination choice behaviour shows consistent
findingsondistinguishingdeterminingfactorsfordestinationchoicedependingonthetype
oflocationpeopleevacuateto.Also,itsuggeststhatgravity-basedtripdistributionmodels
canbeusedtoreconstructevacuees’destinationdecisions.However,giventhatthenumber
of studies is limited and a number of these rely on the same data set, it remains unclear
whetherthesefindingscanbegeneralized.Moreresearchisneededtoshowwhetherthisis
the case. Future research on evacuation trip distribution modelling should preferably be
123

===== PAGE 17 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 113
focused on a dynamic approach as this allows capturing the time-dependent destination
availability, prevailing travel times, and prevailing risk threat to the destinations (Cheng
et al. 2008).
Lessfocusislaidontravellers’destinationchoiceby,forexample,Peletal.(2008)and
Peeta and Hsu (2009). In these traffic simulation models particularly used in short or no
notice evacuation it is assumed that travellers do not choose their destination upon
departure, but instead tend to choose the route which leads them out of the threatened
regionassoonaspossible.Oncesafe,theycontinuetheirtriptotheirfinaldestination.This
and other route choice models are discussed next.
Traffic assignment modelling
Traffic assignment relates to assigning travellers to routes, thereby modelling travellers’
routechoicedecisions.Anumberofstudiesreportoncomputingevacuationtimeestimates
without the use of traffic assignment as defined here (e.g., Lindell and Prater 2007; Van
Zuilekometal.2005).Thesemethodssidesteproutechoicebehaviourbysimplylookingat
the total spatially distributed travel demand, the available network exit points, and the
capacity bottlenecks in the road network. The ratio of the travel demand (in number of
travellers) and network supply (in number of travellers that can pass per unit of time),
together with some correction terms, then may give a quick prediction on the minimum
time required for the complete evacuation. However, this approach certainly does not
providefullinsightintotheactualevacuationtimesofregionsandneighbourhoods,northe
dynamic evacuation traffic conditions, nor the determining factors underlying the evacu-
ationprocess.Therefore,wewillnotdiscussthistypeofmodels,sincethisarticlefocuses
on traveller behaviour in evacuation traffic simulation models (and the fact that these
modelsareusuallyappliedtogaininsightintothedeterminantsofthesuccessorfailureof
an evacuation and how these can be manipulated).
Westructurethefollowingdiscussiononroutechoicemodelsbydistinguishingmodels
thatassumeroutedecisionstooccurpre-trip(‘‘Pre-triproutechoicemodels’’section),en-
route(‘‘En-routeroutechoicemodels’’section),andthosecombiningpre-tripanden-route
routedecisions(‘‘Hybridroutechoicemodels’’section).Theuserequilibriumassignment
assumptionappliedinmostofthetrafficsimulationmodelsdiscussedin‘‘Pastandcurrent
evacuationtrafficsimulationmodels’’sectionfallsunderthe pre-triproute choicemodels
discussed next.
Pre-trip route choice models
Within pre-trip route choice models, travellers are assumed to choose their route from
origintodestinationupondeparture(thustermedpre-trip)anddonotswitchrouteswhile
travelling. These routes are chosen based on the currently prevailing or expected route
utilities. The chosen routes may prove to be not the most attractive routes when the
resulting traffic conditions (derived after simulation) deviate from the initially predicted
trafficconditions onwhichthe routechoices were based.Therefore,typicallyaniterative
procedure is used that allows travellers to choose a different route in the next iteration,
based on the actually experienced route costs. Repeating this process over a sufficiently
largenumberofiterationsleadstoauserequilibriumassignmentinwhichnotravellercan
unilaterally switch routes and be better off (Wardrop’s equilibrium law, see Wardrop
1952).
123

===== PAGE 18 =====

114 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
Insimulatingpre-triproutechoice,routeflowfractionsarecomputedattheoriginsand
travellers are propagated from origins to destinations along these routes. The route flow
fractions are determined by the probabilities that each route has the highest route utility,
where these expected route utilities more closely resemble the actual (observed) route
utilitiesasthenumberofiterationsincreases.Thesepre-triproutechoicemodelswithinan
equilibrium framework are generally used for many dynamic traffic assignment applica-
tions, though mainly for long-term planning purposes where it can be assumed that trav-
ellershavepastexperiencesleadingtowell-informedexpectationsaboutthefuturetraffic
conditionsthattheywillencounterduringtheirtrip.Thisassumptionontravellers’learning
andhabitformationismostlikelynotanappropriateassumptionforthecaseofevacuation
routechoicebehaviour.Thereasonforthisisthatevacuationisalow-frequentexceptional
event accompanied by an unusual travel demand pattern and unusual network capacity
(due to the combination of different driving behaviour, dynamic traffic control measures,
and the adverse disaster conditions) resulting in different-from-normal traffic conditions,
which are difficult to anticipate on.
Thepre-triproutechoicemodelinanequilibriumframeworkisappliedinmostofthe
dynamic traffic simulation models discussed in ‘‘Past and current evacuation traffic sim-
ulationmodels’’section,aswellasinanumberofotherevacuationstudies(e.g.,Goemans
and Jansen 2009; Lin et al. 2009; Song et al. 2009).
An approach which is equivalent to an iterative user equilibrium assignment is by
applying an incremental assignment method adopted by, for instance, Brown et al.
(2009) while developing a hurricane evacuation model. Here, (pre-trip) route choices
are modelled sequentially, instead of iteratively. Travellers are assigned to a route in a
step-wise fashion. In one step, the (predicted) route costs are computed and a small
number of travellers are assigned to the then most attractive routes. In the next step,
the route costs are updated based on the new route flows, and again a small number of
travellers are assigned to the most attractive routes. When the increments (i.e., the
number of travellers assigned to a new route in each step) are sufficiently small, then a
user equilibrium assignment is reached once all steps are executed and all travellers
have been assigned to a route. Therefore, the same (likely inappropriate) behavioural
assumption is made as with the iterative procedure computing the user equilibrium
assignment.
In some of the traffic simulation models discussed in ‘‘Past and current evacuation
traffic simulation models’’ section (OREMS, MASSVAC, VISSIM, INDY) user-defined
routes and route flow fractions can be model input. This allows evaluating (mandatory)
instructions regarding prescribed evacuation routes. These prescribed evacuation routes
do not necessarily minimize individual travel costs, thus leading to a user equilibrium,
but may instead aim at minimizing, for instance, the total travel costs, thus leading to a
system optimum (simulated by, e.g., Li et al. 2006; Liu et al. 2007; Kalafatas and Peeta
2009; Zheng et al. 2010). Other optimization objectives than the system optimum have
been used. An overview can be found in Yuan and Han (2009) and Huibregtse et al.
(2010). The important issue here is that testing evacuation route instructions while
simulating pre-trip route choice disables incorporating (partial) traveller compliance
behaviour. It is necessarily assumed that travellers fully comply, since the pre-trip route
choice model does not allow travellers to deviate from their (prescribed) evacuation
route during their trip. The discussion in ‘‘Traveller behaviour under evacuation
conditions’’ section shows that this full compliance assumption is most certainly too
strict.
123

===== PAGE 19 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 115
En-route route choice models
Theassumptionthattravellerscannotdeviatefromtheir(pre-trip)chosenrouteisrelaxed
in case of en-route route choice. Here, travellers observe prevailing traffic conditions as
they travel, and make route choice decisions accordingly. En-route route choice models
thus simulate travellers who travel from one intersection to the next, every time deciding
onthenextdownstreamdirectionbasedonrouteguidanceortheavailableinformationon
the prevailing (instantaneous or predicted) traffic conditions.
Insimulatingen-routeroutechoice,linkflowfractions(alsocalledsplitproportionsor
turn fractions) are computed at all intersection nodes, and travellers are propagated from
oneintersectionnodetothenextalongthedownstreamlinks.Thelinkflowfractionfora
downstreamlinkiscomputedbytheprobabilitythatanyroute(startingattheintersection
node) in this downstream direction has the lowest route costs. This myopic opportunistic
travel behaviour is described by, for instance, a set of fuzzy rules (Peeta and Yu 2005),
recurrent neural network (Yang et al. 1995), fuzzy network (Hawas 2004), or discrete
probabilistic choice model (Dia et al. 2001; Adler et al. 1993). This approach has been
mainlyappliedindynamictrafficassignmentapplicationsontheimpactofrouteguidance
ortrafficinformation.Evacuationstudiesusingtheen-routeroutechoicemodelarescarce.
OnepossibleexampleisthestudybyMitchellandRadwan(2006)usingINTEGRATION
(Rakha and van Aerde 2004) to study the impact of evacuation staging on network
clearancetime.However,itshouldbementionedthatINTEGRATIONprovidesbothpre-
trip and en-route route choice models and it is not fully clear which route choice model
alternative was used in this study.
Hybrid route choice models
The assumption that travellers fully rely on past experiences in their route decisions (as
madeinpre-triproutechoicemodels),aswellastheassumptionthattravellersbasetheir
route decisions solely on prevailing traffic conditions (as made in en-route route choice
models), are both relaxed in the hybrid route choice models. The hybrid models incor-
porate the impact of unfamiliarity with traffic conditions and the provision of en-route
traffic information by combining pre-trip route choice with en-route route switching.
Travellers are assumed to choose an initial route upon departure, after which they may
adapttheirrouteduringtheirtrip.Theymightdosowhenprevailingtrafficconditionsare
such that travellers are better off (or have the feeling of being better off) by deviating to
anotherroute.AhybridroutechoicemodelisusedinDYNASMART(Mahmassani2001)
and EVAQ (Pel et al. 2009, 2011). The main difference is that in the mesoscopic
DYNASMARTmodeltherouteswitchingischeckedforeachindividualtraveller,whilein
the macroscopic EVAQ model this is checked for each intersection node and each class
of travellers having the same initial route.
In the macroscopic hybrid route choice model used in EVAQ, travellers who initially
follow the same (pre-trip) route are said to belong to the same class. The class-specific
routeflowfractionsarecomputedatallintersectionnodes,andtravellersofallclassesare
propagatedalongtheseroutesuntilsometravellersdecidetoswitchtoanalternativeroute.
Therouteflowfractionsfortravellersofaspecificclass(i.e.,initiallyfollowingthesame
route)switchingtoanalternativerouteisgivenbytheprobabilitythatthisalternativeroute
has the lowest route costs.
Note that the pre-trip route choice model and en-route route choice model are special
cases of the hybrid route choice model. In both of the hybrid route choice models
123

===== PAGE 20 =====

116 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
mentioned above, travellers only consider switching routes when the alternative route
provides some minimum improvement. In the special case when this minimum improve-
ment is set to infinite, travellers never deviate from their pre-trip chosen route (thus
modelling pre-trip route choice). Whereas in the special case when this minimum
improvement is set to zero, travellers always choose the then most attractive route,
independent of their initial pre-trip chosen route (thus modelling en-route route choice).
Values for the minimum improvement between zero and infinite allow modelling inter-
mediatestateswheretravellersmakeatrade-offbetweencontinuingonthepre-tripchosen
route and diverting to a more attractive route.
Hybrid route choice models allow modelling and evaluating evacuation route instruc-
tions, while accounting for partial traveller compliance. In this case, the initial (pre-trip
chosen) routes can be set as the prescribed evacuation routes. Hence, the minimum
improvement for travellers to deviate from their route represents the level of travellers’
compliance, where a higher minimum improvement leads to a higher compliance level
(since this reduces the probability of a more attractive alternative route), and vice versa.
Thisway,thehybridroutechoicemodelformulationinEVAQhasbeenexploitedbyPel
etal.(2010a)toevaluatetheimpactofpartialtravellercomplianceonexistingevacuation
traffic plans, and by Pel et al. (2010c) to design new optimal evacuation plans while
anticipating partial traveller compliance behaviour.
Discussion
Pre-trip routechoice isimplemented inmanytraffic simulationmodelsincludingmost of
thoseusedinevacuationstudiesreportedin‘‘Pastandcurrentevacuationtrafficsimulation
models’’ section. That the underlying behavioural assumption that travellers have well-
informed expectations about the future traffic conditions that they will encounter during
theirtrip(possiblyfrompastexperiences)isinappropriate,issupportedbythediscussion
in ‘‘Traveller behaviour under evacuation conditions’’ section as well as a number of
empiricalstudies.Theseempiricalstudiesshowthelargeroleofreroutingbehaviour,thus
favouring the en-route and hybrid route choice models. For instance, Knoop et al. (2010)
analyse how travellers use the provided traffic information when faced with otherwise
unfamiliar traffic conditions (in this case not evacuation, but the aftermath of large scale
traffic accidents). They found that a large share of travellers (up to 50%) is inclined to
switch routes based on the prevailing traffic information. Also, rerouting is much more
often observed when the origin of the adverse traffic conditions is an uncommon event
(inthiscasethemajortrafficaccident),ascomparedtoequaladversetrafficconditionsdue
toarecurringevent(e.g.,day-to-dayfluctuationsintraveldemandandnetworkcapacity).
Similar conclusions were drawn by Robinson and Khattak (2010) using stated choice
preference surveys on route choice under hypothetical evacuation situations. They
observed that a large share of respondents (up to 72%) anticipated rerouting in case of
evacuation, regardless of whether or not they frequently altered routes under non-evacu-
ationconditionstoavoidcongestion.Thisreroutingbehaviourcanonlybesimulatedusing
en-route or hybrid route choice models.
En-route and hybrid route choice models have another related advantage over pre-trip
routechoicemodels.Namely,theabilitytomodelreal-timetravellerresponsestochanges
intheroadnetworkconditionsduetothehazard’sevolutioninspaceandtime(e.g.,road
sectionsbecominginaccessibleduetoflooding)anddynamictrafficregulationsandcontrol
measures (e.g., contraflow operations to increase outbound capacity). The effect of these
roadinfrastructure dynamicscan onlybeproperlymodelled by en-routeand hybridroute
123

===== PAGE 21 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 117
choicemodels.Thisisduetothefactthatinmodelswithpre-triproutechoicethereisno
waytoavoidtravellersfromfollowingthechosenroute,evenifthenextlinkisobviously
inaccessible.Therefore,thepossibilityofinaccessibleroadsectionsduetonetworkfall-out
prohibitspre-triproutechoiceandrequiresen-routeroutedecisionsoncetravellersbecome
aware of the changes in network conditions. Consequently, travellers will take detours
around prevailing inaccessible sections of the road network.
Finally, when testing and evaluating optimal evacuation routes, hybrid route choice
models allow simulating partial traveller compliance behaviour, which is most likely to
occur,asarguedin‘‘Travellerbehaviourunderevacuationconditions’’section.Byvarying
the minimum improvement that travellers require before deviating from their dedicated
evacuation route, insight can be gained into the impact of evacuation instructions under
various traveller compliance levels. This enables both testing the robustness of existing
evacuation plans towards uncertain traveller compliance levels, as well as designing
evacuation plans while anticipating the expected traveller compliance behaviour.
In sum, hybrid route choice models are the most flexible and likely also the most
appropriateapproachinmodellingtravellers’routechoicebehaviourduringevacuation,as
these allow incorporating the impact of dynamic traffic information, changes in the road
network conditions, and partial traveller compliance behaviour towards evacuation route
instructions.Thatthesefactorsplayanimportantroleinevacuationstudiesisshownbythe
discussion in ‘‘Traveller behaviour under evacuation conditions’’ section.
Afinalnotecanbemadehereonthefactthatsimulatedroutechoicedecisionsareoften
determined by (expected) (prevailing) route travel times. The generalized route costs can
arguablybeappendedwithotherattributesplayingaroleintravellers’routedecisions.For
instance, Chiu and Mirchandani (2008) argue that there is a bias towards using familiar
routesandmotorways,wherethelattermightbeascribedtotheperceptionoftheseroads
beingmorereliable.ThisissupportedbythestudiesbyDowandCutter(2002)andLindell
and Prater (2006) reporting high traffic volumes on the interstate motorways in the
evacuations preceding respectively hurricane Floyd and hurricane Katrina despite the
availability of alternative routes using rural roads. Further research is needed to show
the actual role that these and similar route attributes play in evacuation route decisions.
Concluding comments
Thecontentandcontributionofthisarticleistwofold.Firstofall,itstructuresthecurrent
state-of-the-practice in evacuation traffic simulation studies. To this end, a perspective is
givenonpastandpresentevacuationtrafficsimulationmodels,andthecurrentconsensus
onevacuationtravelbehaviour.Thelatterbasedonpsycho-behaviouralconstructsfromthe
social sciences and empirical studies on evacuation behaviour. We argued that people do
not automatically follow the advice and orders from public officials, but tend to seek
information, assess their personal risk, and make independent evacuation decisions. It is
therefore essential that dynamic traffic simulation models that aim to simulate an evacu-
ationsimulatethisreactivetravellerbehaviour,therewithincorporatingtheimportantrole
of time-varying disaster conditions, (traffic) information, and warnings, discretionary
advice and evacuation orders. From this viewpoint, the different model formulations to
simulate travel behaviour were elaborated on, as well as their suitability to the case of
evacuation.Fortheevacuationparticipationanddeparturetimechoicewearguedinfavour
ofthesimultaneousapproachtodynamicevacuationdemandpredictionusingtherepeated
binarylogitmodel.Therepeatedbinarylogitmodelprovidesinsightintotrade-offsmade
123

===== PAGE 22 =====

118 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
in the decision to evacuate, resulting in dynamic travel demands that on an aggregated
levelaremoreorlessconsistentwiththeobservedchoices.Forthedestinationchoicewe
showedhowfutureresearchisneededtogeneralizethecurrentpreliminaryfindingsonthe
location-specific (gravity-based) destination choice models. For the evacuation route
choice we argued in favour of the use of a hybrid route choice model. This since hybrid
route choice models allow incorporating the impact of dynamic traffic information,
changesintheroadnetworkconditions,andpartialtravellercompliancebehaviourtowards
evacuation route instructions.
Second of all, this article gives direction to the current state-of-the-art in modelling
evacuation travel behaviour. This is done by reviewing and consolidating the past and
currentresearcheffortsondifferentmodelformulationsdescribingtheevacuationchoice,
departure time choice, destination choice, and route choice. Within each of these discus-
sions,wepointedatcurrentlimitationsandmadecorrespondingsuggestionsonpromising
future research directions.
OpenAccess ThisarticleisdistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionNoncom-
mercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
providedtheoriginalauthor(s)andsourcearecredited.
References
Abdelgawad, H., Abdulhai, B.: Emergency evacuation planning as a network design problem: a critical
review.Transp.Lett.1(1),41–58(2009)
Adler,J.L.,Recker,W.W.,McNally,M.G.:Aconflictmodelandinteractivesimulator(FASTCARS)for
predictingen-routedriverbehaviourinresponsetoreal-timetrafficconditioninformation.Transpor-
tation20(2),83–106(1993)
Aguirre, B.E.: Commentary on understanding mass panic and other collective responses to threat and
disaster:emergencyevacuations,panic,andsocialpsychology.Psychiatry68,121–129(2005)
Alsnih, R., Rose, J., Stopher, P.: Understanding household evacuation decisions using a stated choice
survey—casestudyofbushfires.In:Proceedingsofthe84thAnnualMeetingTransportationResearch
Board,Washington,DC,USA(2005)
Baddeley, A.D.: Selective attention and performance in dangerous environments. Br. J. Psychol. 63,
537–546(1972)
Baker,E.J.:Hurricaneevacuationbehavior.Int.J.MassEmerg.Disasters9(2),287–310(1991)
Baker,E.J.:Publicresponsestohurricaneprobabilityforecasts.Prof.Geogr.47(2),137–147(1995)
Balakrishna, R., Wen, Y., Ben-Akiva, M., Antoniou, C.: Simulation-based framework for transportation
networkmanagementforemergencies.Transp.Res.Rec.2041,80–88(2008)
Barrett,B., Ran,B., Pillai,R.:Developinga dynamictrafficmanagement modellingframeworkforhur-
ricaneevacuation.Transp.Res.Rec.1733,115–121(2000)
Blake, S.J., Galea, E.R., Westeng, H., Dixon, A.J.P.: An analysis of human behavior during the WTC
disaster of 11 September 2001 based on published survivor accounts. In: Proceedings of the Third
International Symposium on Human Behavior in Fire, pp. 181–192. InterScience Communications,
London(2004)
Bohannon,J.:Directingtheherd:crowdsandthescienceofevacuation.Science310,219–221(2005)
Brodie, M., Weltzien, E., Altman, D.: Experiences of hurricane Katrina evacuees in Houston shelters:
implicationsforfutureplanning.Am.J.PublicHealth96,1402–1408(2006)
Brown, C., White, W., van Slyke, C., Benson, J.D.: Development of a strategic hurricane evacuation
dynamictrafficassignmentmodelfortheHoustonregion.In:Proceedingsofthe88thAnnualMeeting
TransportationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2009)
Carnegie,J.A.,Deka,D.:Usinghypotheticaldisasterscenariostopredictevacuationbehavioralresponse.
In:Proceedingsofthe89thAnnualMeetingoftheTransportationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,
USA(2010)
Chen,X.,Zhan,F.B.:Agent-basedmodelingandsimulationofurbanevacuation:relativeeffectivenessof
simultaneous and staged evacuation strategies. In: Proceedings of the 83rd Annual Meeting Trans-
portationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2004)
123

===== PAGE 23 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 119
Cheng,G.:Frictionfactorfunctionscalibrationforhurricaneevacuationtripdistribution.In:Proceedingsof
the86thAnnualMeetingTransportationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2007)
Cheng,G.,Wilmot,C.G.:Investigatetime-dependenttravelcostimpactonhurricaneevacuationdestination
choicemodels. In:Proceedings ofthe88thAnnualMeetingTransportationResearchBoard,Wash-
ington,DC,USA(2009)
Cheng,G.,Wilmot,C.G.,Baker,E.J.:Adestinationchoicemodelforhurricaneevacuation.In:Proceedings
ofthe87thAnnualMeetingTransportationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2008)
Chiu, Y.C., Mirchandani, P.B.: Online behavior-robust feedback information routing strategy for mass
evacuation.IEEETrans.Intell.Transp.Syst.9(2),264–274(2008)
Chiu,Y.,Villalobos,J.,Gautam,B.,Zheng,H.:Modelingandsolvingtheoptimalevacuation-route-flow-
staging problem for no-notice extreme events. In: Proceedings of the 85th Annual Meeting Trans-
portationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2006)
Cornwell, B.: Bonded fatalities: relational and ecological dimensions of a fire evacuation. Sociol. Q 44,
617–638(2003)
Court, M., Pittman, J., Alexopoulos, C., Goldsman, D., Kim, S., Loper, M., Pritchett, A., Haddock, J.:
A framework for simulating human cognitive behavior and movement when predicting impacts of
catastrophicevents.In:2004WinterSimulationConference(2004)
Cova, T.J., Johnson, J.P.: Microsimulation of neighborhood evacuations in the urban–wildlife interface.
Environ.Plan.A34(12),2211–2229(2002)
Cova,T.J.,Johnson,J.P.:Anetworkflowmodelforlane-basedevacuationrouting.Transp.Res.A37(7),
579–604(2003)
Cuellar,L.,Kubicek,D.,Hengartner,N.,Hansson,A.:Emergencyrelocation:populationresponsemodelto
disasters.In:ProceedingsoftheIEEEConferenceonTechnologiesforHomelandSecurity,Boston,
MA,USA,pp.628–635(2009)
Dash,N.,Gladwin,H.:Evacuationdecisionmakingandbehavioralresponses:individualandhousehold.
Nat.HazardsRev.8(3),69–77(2007)
Dash,N.,Morrow,B.H.:Returndelaysandevacuationordercompliance:thecaseofhurricaneGeorgesand
theFloridaKeys.Environ.Hazards2,119–128(2001)
De Jong, M., Helsloot, I.: The effects of information and evacuation plans on civilian response during
the national Dutch crisis exercise ‘Waterproef’. In: Hoogendoorn, S.P., Pel, A.J., Taylor, M.A.P.,
Mahmassani, H. (eds.) Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Evacuation Modeling
andManagement,pp.153–162.Elsevier,Amsterdam(2010)
Deka, D., Carnegie, J.A.: Analyzing evacuation behavior of transportation-disadvantaged populations in
northern New Jersey. In: Proceedings of the 89th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research
Board,Washington,DC,USA(2010)
Dia, H., Harney, D., Boyle, A.: Dynamics of drivers’ route choice decisions under advanced traveller
informationsystems.RoadTransp.Res.10,2–12(2001)
Dombroski,M.,Fischhoff,B.,Fischbeck,P.:Predictingemergencyevacuationandshelteringbehavior:a
structuredanalyticalapproach.RiskAnal.26(6),1675–1688(2006)
Dow, K., Cutter, S.L.: Crying wolf: repeat responses to hurricane evacuation orders. Coast. Manag. 26,
237–252(1998)
Dow, K., Cutter, S.L.: Public orders and personal opinions: household strategies for hurricane risk
assessment.Environ.Hazards2,143–155(2000)
Dow, K., Cutter, S.L.: Emerging hurricane evacuation issues: Hurricane Floyd and South Carolina. Nat.
HazardsRev.3(1),12–18(2002)
Durham,C.M.:Hurricaneevacuation.In:Proceedingsofthe86thAnnualMeetingTransportationResearch
Board,Washington,DC,USA(2007)
Franzese,O.,Han,L.D.:Trafficmodelingframeworkforhurricaneevacuation.Internalreport,OakRidge
NationalLaboratory,OakRidge(2001)
Fu,H.:Developmentofdynamictraveldemandmodelsforhurricaneevacuation.Dissertation,Louisiana
StateUniversity,USA(2004)
Fu,H.,Wilmot,C.G.:Asequentiallogitdynamictraveldemandmodelforhurricaneevacuation.Transp.
Res.Rec.1882,19–26(2004)
Fu,H.,Wilmot,C.G.:Staticvs.dynamicandaggregatevs.disaggregate:acomparisonbetweenpracticeand
researchinhurricaneevacuationtraveldemandmodeling.In:Proceedingsofthe86thAnnualMeeting
TransportationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2007)
Fu, H., Wilmot, C.G., Zhang, H.: Modeling the hurricane evacuation response curve. Transp. Res. Rec.
2022,94–102(2006)
Glass,A.:Psychologicalaspectsofdisaster.JAMA171(2),222–225(1959)
123

===== PAGE 24 =====

120 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
Goemans,J.W.,Jansen,W.R.:DevelopmentandapplicationsofaGIS-basedtrafficevacuationmodelfor
Haaglanden,theNetherlands,usingthe‘Hoogwater?Vrijeweg!’toolbox.In:Proceedingsofthe1st
InternationalConferenceonEvacuationModelingandManagement,TheHague,TheNetherlands(2009)
Goldblatt,R.B.:Evacuationplanning,humanfactorsandtrafficengineeringperspectives.In:Proceedingsof
the2004EuropeanTransportConference,Strasbourg,France(2004)
Han, L.D., Yuan, F.: Evacuation modeling and operations using dynamic traffic assignment and most
desirabledestinationapproaches.In:Proceedingsofthe84thAnnualMeetingTransportationResearch
Board,Washington,DC,USA(2005)
Hardy,M.,Wunderlich,K.,Bunch,J.,Smith,T.:Structuringmodelingandsimulationanalysesforevac-
uation planning and operations. In: Proceedings of the 89th Annual Meeting of the Transportation
ResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2010)
Hawas,Y.E.:Developmentandcalibrationofroutechoiceutilitymodels:neuro-fuzzyapproach.J.Transp.
Eng.130(2),171–182(2004)
Heath, S.E., Kass, P.H., Beck, A.M., Glickman, L.T.: Human and pet-related risk factors for household
evacuationfailureduringanaturaldisaster.Am.J.Epidemiol.153(7),659–665(2001)
Henson,K.M.,Goulias,K.G.,Golledge,R.G.:Anassessmentofactivity-basedmodellingandsimulationfor
applicationsinoperationalstudies,disasterpreparedness,andhomelandsecurity.Transp.Lett.1(1),
19–39(2009)
Hobeika,A.G.,Jamei,B.:MASSVAC:amodelforcalculatingevacuationtimesundernaturaldisaster.In:
ProceedingsoftheComputerSimulationinEmergencyPlanningConference,LaJolla,USA(1985)
Hobeika, A.G., Kim, C.: Comparison of traffic assignments in evacuation modeling. IEEE Trans. Eng.
Manag.45(2),192–198(1998)
Hoogendoorn, R.G.: State-of-the-art driving theory and modeling in case of adverse conditions. Internal
report,DelftUniversityofTechnology,Delft(2010)
Hoogendoorn, S.P., Knoop, V., Pel, A.J., Huibregtse, O.L., Hoogendoorn, R., Landman, R.: Verkeers-
management bij exceptionele omstandigheden [Dutch: Traffic management for exceptional condi-
tions].N.M.Mag.2,25–28(2009)
Hooke,W.H.:USparticipationininternationaldecadefornaturaldisasterreduction.Nat.HazardsRev.1,
2–9(2000)
Huibregtse, O.L., Hoogendoorn, S.P., Bliemer, M.C.J.: Optimization of evacuation measures under
uncertainty. In: Proceedings of the 89th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board,
Washington,DC,USA(2010)
Jonkman,S.N.:Lossoflifeestimationinfloodriskassessment:theoryandapplications.Dissertation,Delft
UniversityofTechnology,TheNetherlands(2007)
Kalafatas, G., Peeta, S.: Planning for evacuation: insights from an efficient network design model.
J.Infrastruct.Syst.15(1),21–30(2009)
KLD:FormulationsoftheDYNEVandI-DYNEVtrafficsimulationmodelsusedinESF.Technicalreport
preparedfortheFederalEmergencyManagementAgency,KLDAssociates,Washington,DC(1984)
Klunder, G., Terbruggen, S., Mak, J., Immers, B.: Large-scale evacuation of the Randstand: evacuation
simulationswiththedynamictrafficassignmentmodelIndy.In:Proceedingsofthe1stInternational
ConferenceonEvacuationModelingandManagement,TheHague,TheNetherlands(2009)
Knoop, V.L., Hoogendoorn, S.P., Van Zuylen, H.J.: Rerouting behaviour of travellers under exceptional
traffic conditions—an empirical analysis of route choice. In: Hoogendoorn, S.P., Pel, A.J., Taylor,
M.A.P.,Mahmassani,H.(eds.)Proceedingsofthe1stInternationalConferenceonEvacuationMod-
elingandManagement,pp.113–128.Elsevier,Amsterdam(2010)
Knowles,L.:Sydneybushfireemergencyevacuation:analysisofqualitativeresearchconductedwithhome
ownersinbushfire-proneareas.InternalReport.InstituteofTransportStudies,UniversityofSydney
(2003)
Lave, B.L., Apt, J.: Planning for natural disasters in a stochastic world. J. Risk Uncertain. 33, 117–130
(2006)
Lave,B.L.,Resendiz-Carrilla,D.,McMichael,F.:Safetygoalsforhigh-hazarddams:aredamstoosafe?
WaterResour.Res.26,1683–1691(1990)
Leach,J.,Campling,J.:SurvivalPsychology.PalgraveMacmillan,Basingstoke(1982)
Lewis,D.:September’sgreatescape:newinformationsystemhelpsmanagehurricaneevacuations.Roads
Bridges39,40–42(2001)
Li,Q.,Yang,X.,Wei,H.:IntegratingtrafficsimulationmodelswithevacuationplanningsysteminaGIS
environment.In:ProceedingsoftheIEEEIntelligenceTransportationSystemsConference,Toronto,
Canada(2006)
Lin,D.Y.,Eluru,N.,Waller,S.T.,Bhat,C.R.:Evacuationplanningusingtheintegratedsystemofactivity-
basedmodelinganddynamictrafficassignment.Transp.Res.Rec.2132,69–77(2009)
123

===== PAGE 25 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 121
Lindell,M.K.:EMBLEM2:anempiricallybasedlargescaleevacuationtimeestimatemodel.Transp.Res.A
42,14–154(2008)
Lindell, M.K., Prater, C.S.: Evacuation from hurricane Katrina: Jefferson and St. Charles parishes.
In:ProceedingsoftheNationalHurricaneConference,Orlando,FL,USA(2006)
Lindell,M.K.,Prater,C.S.:Criticalbehavioralassumptionsinevacuationtimeestimateanalysisforprivate
vehicles:examplesfromhurricaneresearchandplanning.JUrbanPlan.Dev.133(1),18–29(2007)
Lindell,M.K.,Lu,J.C.,Prater,C.S.:Householddecisionmakingandevacuationinresponsetohurricane
Lili.Nat.HazardsRev.6(4),171–179(2005)
Liu,Y.,Lai,X.,Chang,G.:Two-levelintegratedoptimizationsystemforplanningofemergencyevacu-
ation.J.Transp.Eng.32(10),800–807(2006)
Liu, H.X., He, X., Ban, X.: A cell-based many-to-one dynamic system optimal model and its heuristic
solutionmethodforemergencyevacuation.In:Proceedingsofthe86thAnnualMeetingTransportation
ResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2007)
Mahmassani,H.S.:Dynamicnetworktrafficassignmentandsimulationmethodologyinadvancedsystem
managementapplications.Netw.Spat.Econ.1,267–292(2001)
Mawson,A.R.:Understandingmasspanicandothercollectiveresponsestothreatanddisaster.Psychiatry
68,95–113(2005)
Mileti,D.S.,Drabek,T.E.,Haas,E.:Humansystemsinextremeenvironments:asociologicalperspective.
ProgramonTechnology,EnvironmentandMan,MonographNo.21,InstituteofBehavioralScience,
UniversityofColorado,Boulder(1975)
Mitchell,S.W.,Radwan,E.:Heuristicprioritizationofemergencyevacuationstagingtoreduceclearancetime.
In:Proceedingsofthe85thAnnualMeetingTransportationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2006)
Murakami, Y., Minami, K., Kawasoe, T., Ishida, T.: Multi-agent simulation for crisis management.
In:ProceedingsoftheIEEEonKnowledgeMediaNetworkingWorkshop,pp.135–139(2002)
Murray-Tuite,P.:Perspectivesfornetworkmanagementinresponsetounplanneddisruptions.JUrbanPlan.
Dev.133(1),9–17(2007)
Murray-Tuite,P.,Mahmassani,H.S.:Modelofhouseholdtripchainsequencinginanemergencyevacua-
tion.Transp.Res.Rec.1831,21–29(2003)
Murray-Tuite,P.,Mahmassani,H.S.:Transportationnetworkevacuationplanningwithhouseholdactivity
interactions.Transp.Res.Rec.1894,150–159(2004)
Newkirk,R.T.:Theincreasingcostofdisasterin developedcountries:a challengetolocalplanningand
government.J.Conting.CrisisManag.9(3),159–170(2001)
Noh, H., Chiu, Y.C., Zheng, H., Hickman, M., Mirchandani, P.: An approach to modeling demand and
supplyforashort-noticeevacuation.Transp.Res.Rec.2091,91–99(2009)
ORNL:Respondingtoenergy-relatedemergencies.OakRidgeNatl.Lab.Rev.35(2)(2002).http://www.
ornl.gov/info/ornlreview/v35_2_02/responding.shtml
Ozbay,K.,Yazici,A.M.:Analysisofnetwork-wideimpactsofbehavioralresponsecurvesforevacuation
conditions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligence Transportation Systems Conference, Toronto,
Canada(2006)
PBS&J:Evacuationtraveldemandforecastingsystem.Technicalreport,PBS&JInc,Tallahassee,FL,USA
(2000a)
PBS&J:SouthwestLouisianahurricaneevacuationstudy:transportationmodelsupportdocument.PBS&J
Inc,Tallahassee(2000b)
Peeta, S., Hsu, Y.T.: Behavior modeling for dynamic routing under no-notice mass evacuation. In: Pro-
ceedingsofthe12thInternationalConferenceonTravelBehaviourResearch,Jaipur,India(2009)
Peeta,S.,Yu,J.W.:Ahybridmodelfordriverroutechoiceincorporatingen-routeattributesandreal-time
informationeffects.Netw.Spat.Econ.5(1),21–40(2005)
Pel,A.J.,Bliemer,M.C.J.,Hoogendoorn,S.P.:EVAQ:anewanalyticalmodelforvoluntaryandmandatory
evacuation strategies on time-varying networks. In: Proceedings of the 11th IEEE Conference on
IntelligenceTransportationSystems,Beijing,China(2008)
Pel,A.J.,Bliemer,M.C.J.,Hoogendoorn,S.P.:Hybridroutechoicemodelingindynamictrafficassignment.
Transp.Res.Rec.2091,100–107(2009)
Pel,A.J.,Bliemer,M.C.J.,Hoogendoorn,S.P.:Simulatingtravelbehaviorunderevacuationconditions.Eur.
J.Transp.Infrastruc.Res.(underreview)(2011)
Pel, A.J., Hoogendoorn, S.P., Bliemer, M.C.J.: Evacuation modeling including traveler information and
compliancebehavior.In:Hoogendoorn,S.P.,Pel,A.J.,Taylor,M.A.P.,Mahmassani, H.(eds.)Pro-
ceedingsofthe1stInternationalConferenceonEvacuationModelingandManagement,pp.101–111.
Elsevier,Amsterdam(2010a)
Pel,A.J.,Hoogendoorn,S.P.,Bliemer,M.C.J.:Impactofvariationsintraveldemandandnetworksupply
factorsforevacuationstudies.Transp.Res.Rec.(inpress)(2010b)
123

===== PAGE 26 =====

122 Transportation(2012)39:97–123
Pel,A.J.,Huibregtse,O.L.,Hoogendoorn,S.P.,Bliemer,M.C.J.:Optimizingevacuationinstructionswhile
anticipating traveler compliance behavior. In: Proceedings of the 13th IEEE Conference on Intelli-
genceTransportationSystems,MadeiraIsland,Portugal(2010c)
Pelechano,N.,Badler,N.:Modelingcrowdandtrainedleaderbehaviorduringbuildingevacuation.IEEE
Comput.Graph.Appl.26(6),80–86(2006)
Pelechano,N.,O’Brien,K.,Silverman,B.,Badler,N.:Crowdsimulationincorporatingagentpsychological
models, roles and communication. In: Proceedings of the First International Crowd Simulation
Workshop(2005)
Pidd,M.,deSilva,F.N.,Eglese,R.:CEMPS:aconfigurableevacuationmanagementandplanningsystem—
aprogressreport.In:Proceedingsofthe1993WinterSimulationConference(1993)
Plowman,T.:Danger!Hurricanecoming.Planning67(12),16–21(2001)
Quarantelli,E.L.:Thebehaviorofpanicparticipants.Sociol.Soc.Res.41,187–194(1957)
Raggatt,P.,Butterworth,E.,Morrissey,S.:Issuesinnaturaldisastermanagement:communityresponseto
thethreatoftropicalcyclonesinAustralia.DisasterPrev.Manag.2(3),12–21(1993)
Rakha,H.,vanAerde,M.:INTEGRATIONUser’sGuide,vols.IandII.VanAerde&Associates,Kingston
(2004)
Rasid,H.,Wolfgang,H.,Hunt,L.:Post-floodassessmentofemergencyevacuationpoliciesintheRedRiver
basin,southernManitoba.Can.Geogr.44(2),369–386(2000)
Rathi,A.K.,Solanki,R.S.:Simulationoftrafficflowduringemergencyevacuations:amicrocomputerbased
modelingsystem.In:Proceedingsofthe1993WinterSimulationConference(1993)
Robinson,R.M.,Khattak,A.:Routechangedecision-makingbyhurricaneevacueesfacingcongestion.In:
Proceedingsofthe89thAnnualMeetingoftheTransportationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA
(2010)
Schadschneider,A.,Klingsch,W.,Klupfel,H.,Kretz,T.,Rogsch,C.,Seyfried,A.:Evacuationdynamics:
empirical results, modeling and applications. In: Meyers, B. (ed.) Encyclopedia of Complexity and
SystemsScience.Springer,Berlin(2008)
Schmidt,L.J.,Warner,B.:PANIC:Origins,InsightandTreatment.NorthAtlanticBooks,Berkley(2002)
Sheffi,Y.,Mahmassani,H.S.,Powell,W.:NETVAC:ATransportationNetworkEvacuationModel.Center
forTransportationStudies,MIT,Boston(1980)
Shendarkar,A.,Vasudevan,K.,Lee,S.,Son,Y.:CrowdsimulationforemergencyresponseusingBDIagent
basedonvirtualreality.In:Proceedingsofthe2006WinterSimulationConference(2006)
Sherali, H.D., Carter, T.B., Hobeika, A.G.: A location-allocation model and algorithm for evacuation
planningunderhurricane/floodconditions.Transp.Res.B25(6),439–452(1991)
Sime, J.D.: Crowd psychology and engineering: designing for people or ball-bearings? In: Smith, R.A.,
Dickie,J.F.(eds.)EngineeringforCrowdSafety,pp.119–131.Elsevier,NewYork(1993)
Song, W., Zhu, L., Li, Q., Wang, X.D., Liu, Y., Dong, Y.C.: Evacuation model and application for
emergencyevents.In:Proceedingsofthe4thIEEEInternationalConferenceonComputerScienceand
InformationTechnology,Seoul,Korea(2009)
Tu,H.,Tamminga,G.,Drolenga,H.,DeWit,J.,VanDerBerg,W.:EvacuationplanofthecityofAlmere:
simulatingtheimpactofdrivingbehaviorsonevacuationclearancetime.In:Hoogendoorn,S.P.,Pel,
A.J., Taylor, M.A.P., Mahmassani, H. (eds.) Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on
EvacuationModelingandManagement,pp.67–75.Elsevier,Amsterdam(2010)
Tweedie, S., Rowland, J., Walsh, S., Rhoten, R.: A methodology for estimating emergency evacuation
times.Soc.Sci.J.23(2),189–204(1986)
Tyhurst,J.:Individualreactionstocommunitydisaster:thenaturalhistoryofpsychiatricphenomena.Am.
J.Psychiatry107(10),764–769(1951)
US Army Corps of Engineers: Technical guidelines for hurricane evacuation studies. Technical report
(1995)
Van Zuilekom, K., van Maarseveen, M., van der Doef, M.: A decision support system for preventive
evacuationofpeople.In: Geo-Information for Disaster Management, pp. 229–253. Springer,Berlin
(2005)
Wang,H.,Andrews,S.,Daiheng,N.,Collura,J.:Scenario-basedanalysisoftransportationimpactsincase
ofdamfailurefloodevacuationinFranklincounty,Massachusetts.In:Proceedingsofthe89thAnnual
MeetingoftheTransportationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2010)
Wardrop,J.G.:Sometheoreticalaspectsofroadtrafficresearch.In:ProceedingsoftheInstitutionofCivil
EngineersII(1)(1952)
Whitehead,J.C.,Edwards,B.,vanWilligen,M.,Maiolo,J.R.,Wilson,K.,Smith,K.T.:Headingforhigher
ground:factorsaffectingrealandhypotheticalhurricaneevacuationbehaviour.Glob.Environ.Chang.
B2,133–142(2000)
123

===== PAGE 27 =====

Transportation(2012)39:97–123 123
Wickens,C.D.:Attention.In:Hancock,P.A.(ed.)HumanFactorsPsychology,pp.29–79.ElsevierScience
PublishersB.V.,Amsterdam(1987)
Williams,B.,Tagliaferri,A.,Meinhold,S.,Hummer,J.,Rouphail,N.:Simulationandanalysisoffreeway
lanereversalforcoastalhurricaneevacuation.JUrbanPlan.Dev.133(1),61–72(2007)
Wills,R.H.:HumanInstincts,EverydayLife,andtheBrain.BookEmporium,Canada(1998)
Wilmot,C.G.,Meduri,N.:Amethodologytoestablishhurricaneevacuationzones.Transp.Res.Rec.1922,
129–137(2005)
Wilmot, C.G., Mei, B.: Comparison of alternative trip generation models for hurricane evacuation. In:
Proceedings of the 82nd Annual Meeting Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC, USA
(2003)
Wilmot,C.G.,deLapparent,M.,Taylor,M.A.P.,Arce,C.,Baker,E.,Cherrington,L.,Gripsrud,M.,Lian,
J.I.,Manore,M.,Potier,F.:Whatdatadoweneedforthemanagement(andmodelling)ofemergency
situations—andhowcanthedatabecollected?In:Proceedingsofthe1stInternationalConferenceon
EvacuationModelingandManagement,TheHague,TheNetherlands(2009)
Wolshon, B., Urbina, E., Wilmot, C.G., Levitan, M.: Review of policies and practices for hurricane
evacuation.I:Transportationplanning,preparedness,andresponse.Nat.HazardsRev.6(3),129–142
(2005a)
Wolshon, B., Urbina, E., Wilmot, C.G., Levitan, M.: Review of policies and practices for hurricane
evacuation.II:Trafficoperations,management,andcontrol.Nat.HazardsRev.6(3),143–161(2005b)
Woodworth,R.S.:DynamicsofBehavior.Holt,RinehartandWinston,NewYork(1958)
Xie,C.,Lin,D.Y.,Waller,S.T.:Adynamicevacuationnetworkoptimizationproblemwithlanereversaland
crossingeliminationstrategies.Transp.Res.E46,295–316(2010)
Yang,R.H.,Vaughn,K.M.,Abdel-Aty,M.A.,Kitamura,R.,Jovanis,P.P.:Designofanartificialsimulator
foranalyzingroutechoicebehaviorinthepresenceofinformationsystem.InternalreportRP-95-39,
InstituteofTransportationStudies,UniversityofCaliforniaDavis(1995)
Yuan,F.,Han,L.D.:Improvingevacuationplanningwithsensiblemeasureofeffectivenesschoices—acase
study.Transp.Res.Rec.2137,54–62(2009)
Yuan,F.,Han,L.D.,Chin,S.,Hwang,H.:Proposedframeworkforsimultaneousoptimizationofevacuation
trafficdestinationandrouteassignment.Transp.Res.Rec.1964,50–58(2006)
Yusoff, M., Ariffin, J., Mohamed, A.: Optimization approaches for macroscopic emergency evacuation
planning:asurvey.In:ProceedingsoftheIEEEInternationalSymposiumonInformationTechnology,
vol.3,pp.1–7(2008)
Zelinsky, W., Kosinski, L.A.: The emergency evacuation of cities: a cross-national historical and geo-
graphicalstudy.RowmanandLittlefield,Lanham(1991)
Zheng,H.,Chiu,Y.C.,Mirchandani,P.B.,Hickman,M.:Modelingofevacuationandbackgroundtrafficfor
anoptimalzone-basedvehicleevacuationstrategy.In:Proceedingsofthe89thAnnualMeetingofthe
TransportationResearchBoard,Washington,DC,USA(2010)
Author Biographies
Adam J. Pel is working towards a doctoral degree at the Transport and Planning department at Delft
University of Technology. His research interests are in evacuation modelling and optimization, travel
behaviourmodelling,(dynamic)trafficassignment,andtrafficflowsimulation.
Michiel C. J. Bliemer has a background in Econometrics and Operations Research, and is associate
professorTransportationModellingatDelftUniversityofTechnologyintheNetherlands.Furthermore,he
worksatGoudappelCoffengBVasheadofinnovationintransportandtrafficmodels.
Serge P. Hoogendoorn is a professor at Traffic Management at Delft University of Technology. His
research involves theory, modelling, simulation and management of traffic and transportation networks.
Specific fields of interest are traffic data collection for traffic model identification, integrated network
management,andtrafficandmobilitymanagementinexceptionalconditions.
123
