===== PAGE 1 =====

University of Delaware
Disaster Research Center
Preliminary Paper
#283
THE SOCIOLOGY OF PANIC
E. L. Quarantelli
2001

===== PAGE 2 =====

1
The Sociology of Panic*
E. L. Quarantelli
Disaster Research Center
University of Delaware
Newark DE. 19716 USA
*To be published in Smelser and Baltes (eds) International Encyclopedia of the Social
and Behavioral Sciences in 2001.
1

===== PAGE 3 =====

2
ABSTRACT
Sociology of Panic
E. L. Quarantelli
The term "panic" is widely used in everyday speech as well as in the
literature of different professional areas and scientific disciplines. This
article confines itself primarily to discussing how sociologists, historically
and currently, view the phenomena. The justification for such a focus is
that the concept has long been used in the discipline especially in the
sociological subspeciality of collective behavior, and much of the relevant
empirical work has been done by sociologists studying behavior in natural
and technological disasters.
Early approaches to panic were vague in defining the phenomena.
However, most formulations view panic as either extreme and groundless
fear, or flight behavior. Both phenomena are supposedly widespread in
crisis situations. Present day discussions about panic also revolve around
whether or not the behavior is irrational, and whether it is highly
contagious or not. Three major empirical studies that have heavily
influenced present day sociological views about panic are presented. Two
of the studies particularly challenge widespread ideas in the literature
about the phenomena, showing for example that panic flight is very rare,
and has few of the characteristics typically attributed to the behavior, even
in situations where it might be expected.
There are two questions that will loom even larger in the future. One is
why despite the research evidence, the idea of "panic" captures the
popular imagination and continues to be evoked by scholars of human
behavior. A second basic question is whether there is still any scientific
justification for the continuing use of the concept in any technical sense in
the collective behavior area.
2

===== PAGE 4 =====

3
The Sociology of Panic
The term "panic" is widely used in everyday speech as well as in the literature of
different professional areas and scientific disciplines. This leads to a very wide diversity
in the attribution of both the characteristics of and the conditions that generate the
phenomena. However, this article confines itself primarily to how sociologists view
"panic." Thus, it does not consider the substantial but circumscribed literature in
economics that focuses solely on "financial panics," or another set in psychiatry that
deals with "panic states" from a mental health viewpoint. Although a few sociologists
have looked at the first phenomena under the general rubric of panic, the second has
never been of any concern to them.
The focus on sociology is justified for several reasons. From the very origins of
the field, sociologists have used the term as part of their professional vocabulary. The
first introductory sociology textbook states that "panic is the crowd in dissolution" (Park
and Burgess 1924:876) because it is the opposite of the crowd in the sense of not
having any psychological unity. In particular, panic has always been considered part of
the subject matter of the sociological specialization of collective behavior, which deals
with nontraditional and newly emergent forms of social action (see Sociology of
Collective Behavior). Most American textbooks and extended theoretical treatises on
collective behavior discuss panic (Miller 1985) with some giving extensive attention to
the phenomena. Furthermore, such empirical studies of panic as have been
undertaken have been mostly by sociologists studying human and group behavior in
natural and technological disasters (see Sociology of Disasters). Even psychologists,
3

===== PAGE 5 =====

4
who next to sociologists have most looked at panic, primarily cite empirical and
theoretical sociological sources (Schultz 1964).
1. Past Approaches
The first extended and systematic treatment of panic by a sociologist is a
chapter by LaPierre (1938) in a little known book on collective behavior. He sees panic
as dysfunctional escape behavior generated by fortuitous, ever varying circumstances,
but involving impending danger. Panic is never formally defined except as the antithesis
of regimental behavior, which is preplanned collective action for dealing with crises,
such as fire drills in schools. Instead what constitutes panic is illustrated by
presentations of anecdotal examples from stories of disaster behavior in journalistic and
popular sources. While his vague formulations and use of popular sources are typical,
in three major ways, LaPierre differs from many later writers. He does not generally
deal with any covert emotional or feeling state associated with the behavior, and he
avoids use of the term "irrational." In addition, he distinguishes between collective and
individual panic, which is at variance with most treatments which imply panic
necessarily involves a multiplicity of participants.
As just implied, there is little consensus, historically or currently on the use of
the term. Nevertheless, most discussions about the nature of panic can be grouped
into one of two categories. The oldest view, coming out of everyday speech, primarily
equates panic with extreme and groundless fear. This is clearly related to the linguistic
origins of the word which is derived from the Greek god Pan who supposedly was able
to generate sudden and overwhelming fear in the absence of any actual threat. For
many writers taking this position, being seized by such a fear can lead to other irrational
4

===== PAGE 6 =====

5
reactions although the essence of panic is the emotional manifestation, and not what
this might otherwise overtly affect.
Another view, visualizes panic as manifesting itself primarily as flight behavior. In
this conception, the essence of panic is the overt behavior that is marked by the setting
aside of everyday social norms, even the strongest, such as parents abandoning their
young children trying to save themselves in a life threatening crisis. Often implicit, there
is the assumption in this view that such flight behavior will occur only if there is a
perception that there is a possibility of escaping the threat. Disaster researchers in
particular have emphasized that hope of escape rather than hopelessness is what is
involved. Persons who perceived themselves as totally trapped such as in sunken
submarines or collapsed coal mines do not panic because they see no way of getting
away from the threat.
Of course it is possible to put the two general formulations together. Smelser
(1963, 131) defines panic as "collective flight based on a hysterical belief" which allows
him to talk both about overt escape behavior and the selling behavior of investors in
financial panics. But others have noted the relationship between a terror state and rout
behavior is not necessarily a direct one, given that whatever the emotion, it need not
inevitably lead to flight of any kind. Apart from agreeing that panic participants are very
afraid of some perceived threat, there is little agreement otherwise among students of
the phenomena on the relationship of the emotional state involved to what other, if
any, behaviors will be manifested.
2, Current Issues
5

===== PAGE 7 =====

6
Apart from differences about the nature of panic, many discussions of panic
focus on two other major themes. One such theme and a very prominent one is that
which assumes that panic behavior is "irrational." This is often contrasted with the
assumed rationality of most other behavior, where the means-ends relationships are in
balance or where the end result is a positive one. This conception has come under
sharp criticism especially from those who have done empirical studies of the behavior
of people caught in disasters and fire situations (Quarantelli 1981). These researchers
note that when the behavior in such occasions is looked at from the perspective of the
social actors involved, the behavior is very meaningful and far from most conceptions of
irrationality (Johnson 1985). The argument is that nothing is gained by characterizing
the behavior as irrational or along any similar dimension (Wenger 1980). However, it is
still very common and typical for social science textbooks that discuss panic to
characterize it as irrational.
A second major division among scholars is between those who are argue that
panic behavior is very contagious, and that human beings are easily swept up into the
behavior, and those who strongly disagree with such a conception. Many of the early
discussions of panic clearly assume that the participants are overwhelmed by the fearful
emotion of others, and will trample over others in their path. In contrast, are those
researchers who take the position that whatever panic behavior is, it results from
meaningful social interaction among the participants. They note that even in those rare
cases of extreme instances of panic flight, very few spectators ever get caught up in the
behavior.
Several specific studies have particularly influenced all of the previous
6

===== PAGE 8 =====

7
arguments. One is a study by Cantril (1940) on reactions by Americans to a nationally
broadcast radio show supposedly reporting as actual fact an alien invasion from Mars.
The study takes the view that those who panicked upon hearing the broadcast lacked
"critical ability." The behavior was seen as irrational. While even to this day this study
is cited as scientific support for this view of panic, the research has come under sharp
critical scrutiny. Analysts have noted that even taking the data reported at face value,
only a small fraction (12%) of the radio audience ever gave even any remote credence
to the idea that the broadcast was an actual news story. And the accounts of flight
behavior as well as other illogical and bizarre actions reported in the book give the
mistaken idea that they were obtained in the survey study done. Actually, they are
taken almost unacknowledged from journalistic accounts of the time which reported that
supposedly numerous Americans fled wildly to get away from the alien invaders. A
close scrutiny of the actual news report that appeared found that most of them were
sensationalized anecdotal stories that these days are typically reported in the so-called
tabloid press.
The last point is particularly important because much later Rosengren (1978) and
his colleagues studied in a very systematic manner a roughly similar radio show. A
Swedish radio station broadcast a fictitious news program about a nuclear plant
accident that had created radioactive clouds drifting in southern Sweden. Within an
hour, other media were broadcasting about widespread panic reactions in the
population with the print media later reporting panic reactions of various kinds on a large
scale including escape flight. However, the systematic survey study found less than
10% of the audience gave any credence to the broadcast, with less than 1% showing
7

===== PAGE 9 =====

8
any behavioral reaction, and no one who had engaged in flight behavior. The research
showed that the supposed panic reaction of the population was almost exclusively a
mass media creation. There is very little found by this research that would be
supportive of any of the formulations about panic advanced to that time by social
scientists.
More recently, Johnson (1988) did intensive studies of persons caught in
potential provoking panic situations such as a fire in a night club and a stampede during
a rock music concert, where 160 and 11 persons respectively died. The findings are
unambiguous. The great majority of involved persons did not engage in animal like
behavior, contrary to what many early writers on panic suggest occurs. Instead of
ruthless competition, the social order did not breakdown with cooperative rather than
selfish behavior predominating. Contrary to notions of irrationality, there was much
evidence for rational responses in the face of the crisis. While strong emotions were
experienced, these did not lead to maladaptive behavior. These findings reinforced the
ever growing viewpoint among many researchers who have studied what seem
potential panic situations, that prosocial rather than antisocial behavior predominates
even in such contexts.
3, Future Questions
Two additional and fundamental but unresolved questions regarding the concept
of panic, are surfacing. Most scholars seem to agree that whatever "panic" might mean,
the phenomena are statistically quite rare, usually involve only a handful of persons,
and are of short duration. Some researchers have observed that it is very difficult to
find clear-cut cases of actual panic in natural and technological disasters (and that they
8

===== PAGE 10 =====

9
are also extremely rare in the other arena in which they supposedly occur, that is
among soldiers in battles during wars). But the term continues to be widely used and
persists despite the lack of empirical evidence that it happens on any scale; it also
continues as noted by students of popular culture to be the staple of disaster movies
and novels.
Over four decades ago, Wolfenstein (1957) explicitly questioned why despite
what the research evidence showed, the idea of "panic" captures the popular
imagination and continues to be evoked by scholars of human behavior. Using a
psychoanalytical framework, she suggests that the fascination with the term is a
psychological fantasy actually useful and functional in a variety of ways for coping with
personal crises. Some disaster scholars have thought that a more sociological approach
might parallel what Durkheim, a major figure in the origins of sociology, said about
crime. If it did not exist, it would be necessary for human societies to create crime, at
least symbolically, so as to emphasize the fact that human beings generally adhere to
social norms. So perhaps the idea of the possibility of panic is necessary in society to
highlight the fact that human beings in contrast react remarkably well in most stressful
situations and that the social bonds between and among people usually holds.
Supporting this view, as disaster researchers have noted, the mass media in reporting
the absence of panic are behaving as if the normal expectation is that panic will occur.
Whether the merit of the parallel to crime, clearly there is a need to explain the huge
discrepancy between the actual frequency of panics in any sense of the term, and the
exaggerated interest in and widespread use of the word not only in popular culture but
also especially among social scientists who have not researched the phenomena.
9

===== PAGE 11 =====

10
A second basic question is whether there is still any scientific justification for the
continuing use of the concept in any technical sense. Increasingly, students of the
phenomena have questioned if the term "panic" ought to be continued to be used by
students of collective behavior (Mawson 1980, Sime 1981). The logic of the argument
is that such behavior as is attempted to be captured under that label can better be dealt
with by using other concepts. In other words, what is often currently described and
analyzed as panic behavior can be characterized and explained by other terms. Those
taking this view argue that because a word has widespread popular currency and has
been unthinkingly imported into a scientific field should not be seen as necessarily
giving the term any legitimacy. From this perspective, it is possible that the concept of
panic within collective behavior in sociology may disappear as a technical term in the
future.
10

===== PAGE 12 =====

11
Bibliography
Cantril, H. 1940 The Invasion From Mars: A Study in the Psychology of Panic. Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Foreman P 1953 Panic theory. Sociology and Social Research 37: 295-304.
Johnson N 1985 Panic and the breakdown of social order: Popular myth, social theory
and empirical evidence. Sociological Focus 20: 171-183.
Johnson N 1988 Fire in a crowded theater: A descriptive investigation of the emergence
of panic. International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters 6:7-26.
Keating J 1982 The myth of panic. Fire Journal 57-62.
LaPierre R 1938 Collective Behavior. McGraw Hill, New York.
Lofland J 1981 Collective behavior: The elementary forms in Rosenberg S and Turner,
R (ed) Social Psychology: Sociological Perspectives Basic Books, New York.
Mawson A 1980 Is the concept of panic useful for scientific purposes? in Second
International Seminar on Human Behavior in Fire Emergencies. National Bureau of
Standards, Washington.
Miller D Introduction to Collective Behavior Wadsworth, Belmont CA
Park R Burgess E 1924 Introduction to the Science of Sociology. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Quarantelli E 1954 The nature and conditions of panic. American Journal of Sociology
60:265-275.
Quarantelli E 1957 The behavior of panic participants. Sociology and Social Research
41: 187-194.
11

===== PAGE 13 =====

12
Quarantelli E 1981 Panic behavior in fire situations: Findings and a model from the
English language research literature in Proceedings of the 4th Joint Panel Meeting, the
UJNRR Panel on Fire Research and Safety Building Research Institute, Tokyo.
Rosengren K, Arvidsson P, Sturesson D 1978 The Barseback "Panic": A Case of Media
Deviance in Winick C (ed) Deviance and Mass Media Sage, Beverly Hills.
Schultz D (ed) 1964. Panic Behavior: Discussion and Readings.
Random House, New York.
Sime J 1981 The concept of panic in Canter D (ed) Fires and Human Behavior
Wiley, New York.
Smelser N 1963. Theory of Collective Behavior. Free Press, New York.
Strauss A 1944 The literature on panic. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 29: 317-328.
Wenger D 1980 Some Observations on the Nature of Panic Behavior: A Normative
Orientation in Leven B, Paulsen R (ed) Second International Seminar on Human
Behavior in Fire Emergencies. Washington, National Bureau of Standards.
Wolfenstein M 1957 Disaster: A Psychological Essay Free Press, Glencoe.
12
