===== PAGE 1 =====

MOBIL: General Lane-Changing Model for Car-Following Models
Arne Kesting, Dipl.-Phys. (corresponding author)
Institute for Transport & Economics
Technische Universit¨at Dresden
Andreas-Schubert-Strasse 23
D-01062 Dresden, Germany
phone: +49 351 463 36838
fax: +49 351 463 36809
kesting@vwi.tu-dresden.de
Martin Treiber, Dr.
Institute for Transport & Economics
Technische Universit¨at Dresden
Andreas-Schubert-Strasse 23
D-01062 Dresden, Germany
phone: +49 351 463 36794
fax: +49 351 463 36809
treiber@vwi.tu-dresden.de
Dirk Helbing, Prof. Dr.
Institute for Transport & Economics
Technische Universit¨at Dresden
Andreas-Schubert-Strasse 23
D-01062 Dresden, Germany
phone: +49 351 463 36802
fax: +49 351 463 36809
helbing@vwi.tu-dresden.de
Word count:
Abstract: 234
Main text: 5500
Figures and Tables: 5
Revision date: November 15, 2006

===== PAGE 2 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 2
Abstract
Weproposeageneralmodeltoderivelane-changingrulesfordiscretionaryandmandatorylane
changes for a wide class of car-following models. Both the utility of a given lane and the risk
associated with lane changes is determined in terms of longitudinal accelerations calculated
with the microscopic traffic models. This allows for the formulation of compact and general
safety and incentive criteria both for symmetric and asymmetric passing rules. Moreover,
anticipative elements and the crucial influence of velocity differences of these car-following
models are automatically transferred to the lane-changing rules.
Whilethesafetycriterionpreventscriticallanechangesandcollisions, theincentivecriterion
also takes into account the (dis-)advantages of other drivers associated with a lane change via
the ’politeness factor’. The parameter allows to vary the motivation for lane-changing from
purely egoistic to more cooperative driving behavior. This novel feature allows first to prevent
change lanes for a marginal advantage if this obstructs other drivers, and, second, to let a
’pushy’driverinducealanechangeofaslowerdriveraheadinordertobenolongerobstructed.
This is a common phenomenon for asymmetric passing rules with a dedicated lane for passing.
We apply the model to traffic simulations of cars and trucks with the Intelligent Driver
Model (IDM) as underlying car-following model. We study an open system with an on-ramp
and investigate the resulting lane-changing rate as a function of the spatial coordinate as well
as a function of traffic density.

===== PAGE 3 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 3
1 Introduction
In the past, single-lane car-following models have been successfully applied to describe traffic
dynamics (Nagatani, 2002; Helbing, 2001). Particularly collective phenomena such as traf-
fic instabilities and the spatiotemporal dynamics of congested traffic can be well understood
within the scope of single-lane traffic models. But real traffic consists of different types of ve-
hicles, e.g., cars and trucks. Therefore, a realistic description of heterogeneous traffic streams
is only possible within a multi-lane modeling framework allowing faster vehicles to improve
their driving conditions by passing slower vehicles. Hence, freeway lane changing has recently
received increased attention (Laval and Daganzo, 2006; Hidas, 2005; Coifman et al., 2005;
Wei et al., 2000; Brackstone et al., 1998; Nagel et al., 1998). Moreover, since lane-changing
maneuvers often act as initial perturbations, it is crucial to understand their impact on the
capacity, stability, and breakdown of traffic flows. Particularly near bottleneck sections such
as on-ramps and off-ramps, lane changing is often a significant ingredient to trigger a traffic
breakdown (provided that the traffic volume is high) (Laval and Daganzo, 2004). Additionally,
the drivers’ lane-changing behavior has direct influence on traffic safety.
Despite its great significance, lane-changing has by far not been studied as extensively as
the longitudinal acceleration and deceleration behavior. One reason for this is the scarcity
of reliable data (Hidas and Wagner, 2004; Brackstone and McDonald, 1996). For measuring
lane changes, cross-sectional data from detectors are not sufficient and, therefore, only a few
empiricalstudiesaboutlane-changingratesasafunctionoftrafficflowordensityareavailable.
Sparmann (1978) investigated the lane-changing rates on a German two-lane autobahn. Data
for a British motorway were presented by Yousif and Hunt (1995). Recent progress in video
tracking methods, however, allows for a collection of high-quality trajectory data from aerial
observations (Hoogendoorn et al., 2003; NGSIM, 2006). These 2D data will become more
and more available in the future and will allow for a more profound understanding of the
microscopic lane-changing processes.
The modeling of lane changes is typically considered as a multi-step process. On a strategic
level, the driver knows about his or her route in a network, which influences the lane choice,
e.g., with regard to lane blockages, on-ramps, off-ramps, or other mandatory merges (Toledo
etal.,2005). Inthetactical stage,anintendedlanechangeispreparedandinitiatedbyadvance
accelerations or decelerations of the driver, and possibly by cooperation of drivers in the target
lane (Hidas, 2005). Finally, in the operational stage, one determines if an immediate lane
change is both safe and desired (Gipps, 1986). This choice is typically modeled by the use of
gap-acceptance models, in which drivers compare the available gaps to the smallest acceptable
gap,thecriticalgap. Criticalgapsdependingeneralontherelativespeedofthesubjectvehicle
withrespecttothoseoftheleadandthelagvehiclesintheadjacentlaneandonthetypeoflane
change (Toledo et al., 2003). Most lane-changing models in the literature classify lane changes
as either mandatory or discretionary (Gipps, 1986; Yang and Koutsopoulos, 1996; Ahmed,
1999; Toledo et al., 2003; Halati et al., 1997; Skabardonis, 2002). While mandatory changes
are performed for strategic reasons, the driver’s motivation for discretionary lane changes is
a perceived improvement of the driving conditions in the target lane compared to the actual
situation.
In this paper, we present a lane-changing model for microscopic car-following models, which
describes the rational decision to change lanes and, therefore, only deals with the operational
decision process. When considering a lane change, we assume that a driver makes a trade-
off between the expected own advantage and the disadvantage imposed on other drivers. In
particular, our model includes the follower on the target lane in the decision process. For a

===== PAGE 4 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 4
driver considering a lane change, the subjective utility of a change increases with the gap to
the new leader on the target lane. However, if the velocity of this leader is lower, it may be
favorable to stay on the present lane despite of the smaller gap. A criterion for the utility
including both situations is the difference of the accelerations after and before the lane change.
In this work, we therefore propose as utility function considering the difference in vehicle
accelerations (or decelerations) after a lane change, calculated with an underlying microscopic
longitudinal traffic model. The higher the acceleration on a given lane, the nearer it is to the
’ideal’ acceleration on an empty road and the more attractive it is to the driver. Therefore,
the basic idea of our proposed lane-changing model is to formulate the anticipated advantages
and disadvantages of a prospective lane change in terms of single-lane accelerations.
Compared to explicit lane-changing model, the formulation in terms of accelerations of a
longitudinal model has several advantages. First, the assessment of the traffic situation is
transfered to the acceleration function of the car-following model, which allows for a compact
and general model formulation with only a small number of additional parameters. In contrast
to the classical gap-acceptance approach, critical gaps are not taken into account explicitly.
Second, it is ensured that both longitudinal and lane-changing models are consistent with each
other. For example, if the longitudinal model is collision-free, the combined models will be
accident-free as well. Third, any complexity of the longitudinal model such as anticipation
is transfered automatically to a similarly complex lane-changing model. Finally, the braking
deceleration imposed on the new follower on the target lane to avoid accidents is an obvious
measure for the (lack of) safety. Thus, safety and motivational criteria can be formulated in a
unified way.
Apart from using accelerations as utility functions, the main novel feature of the proposed
lane-changing model consists in taking into account the (dis-) advantage of the followers via
a politeness parameter. By adjusting this parameter, the motivations for lane-changing can
be varied from purely egoistic to a more altruistic behavior. Particularly, there exists a value
where lane changes are only carried out if this increases the combined accelerationsof the lane-
changing driver and all affected neighbors. This strategy can be paraphrased by the acronym
’MinimizingOverallBrakingInducedbyLaneChanges’(MOBIL).Inthefollowing,wewillrefer
to our concept by this acronym, regardless of the value of the politeness parameter. Notice
that all lane-changing models cited before assume egoistic behavior. By the politeness factor,
we can model two common lane-changing patterns. First, most drivers do not change lanes for
a marginal advantage if this obstructs other drivers in addition to a common safety condition.
Second, in countries with asymmetric lane-changing rules, ’pushy’ drivers may induce a lane
change of a slower driver in front of them in order to the slower lane to be no longer obstructed
on the faster lane, which is dedicated to passing.
Our paper is organized as follows: In Sec. 2, we formulate the lane-changing model MOBIL
both for symmetric (’US’) and asymmetric (’European’) passing rules. In Sec. 3, we apply
the MOBIL rules and simulate multi-lane traffic in combination with the Intelligent Driver
Model (IDM) as underlying longitudinal car-following model (Treiber et al., 2000). Finally, in
Sec. 4, we will conclude with a discussion of the proposed model, future research directions,
and a generalization of the MOBIL concept to other traffic-related decision processes, e.g.,
when approaching traffic lights.
2 The lane-changing model MOBIL
Most time-continuous microscopic single-lane traffic models describe the motion of single
’vehicle-driver units’ α as a function of their own velocity vα, the bumper-to-bumper distance

===== PAGE 5 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 5
~
a
n c
a
o c c
Figure 1: Sketch of the nearest neighbors of a central vehicle c considering a lane change to the left.
The new and old successors are denoted by n and o, respectively. Accelerations after a possible change
are denoted with a tilde.
sα to the front vehicle (α 1) and the relative velocity ∆vα = vα vα−1 . The acceleration of
− −
these car-following models is of the general form
dvα
aα := = a(sα, vα, ∆vα). (1)
dt
Some examples are the model of Gipps (1986), the ’optimal velocity model’ (Bando et al.,
1995), the ’intelligent driver model’ (Treiber et al., 2000), or the ’velocity difference model’
(Helly,1959;Jiangetal.,2001). Moreover,ageneralizationtomodelstakingintoaccountmore
than one predecessor (Belexius, 1968; Lenz et al., 1999; Treiber et al., 2006), or to models with
explicit reaction time, is straightforward.
A specific lane change, e.g., from the center lane to the median lane as shown in Fig. 1
dependsgenerallyonthetwofollowingvehiclesonthepresentandthetargetlane, respectively.
In order to formulate the lane-changing criteria, we use the following notation: For a vehicle c
consideringalanechange,thesuccessivevehiclesonthetargetandpresentlanearerepresented
by n and o, respectively. The acceleration ac denotes the acceleration of vehicle c on the actual
lane, while a˜c refers to the situation on the target lane, i.e., to the new acceleration of vehicle
c on the target lane. Likewise, a˜o and a˜n denote the acceleration of the old and new followers
after the lane change of vehicle c.
2.1 Safety criterion
Like other lane-changing models (Gipps, 1986), we distinguish between an incentive to change
lanes and safety constraints. The safety criterion checks the possibility of executing a lane
change (gap acceptance) by considering the effect on the upstream vehicle on the target lane.
Formulated in terms of longitudinal accelerations, our safety criterion guarantees that, after
the lane change, the deceleration of the successor a˜n on the target lane does not exceed a given
safe limit b , i.e.,
safe
a˜n b
safe
. (2)
≥ −
Althoughformulatedasasimpleinequality,thisconditioncontainsalltheinformationprovided
by the longitudinal car-following model via the acceleration a˜n(t) typically depending on the
gap, the velocity and, eventually, on the approaching rate, cf. Eq. (1). In particular, if the
longitudinal model has a built-in sensitivity with respect to velocity differences, this essential
dependence is transfered to the lane-changing decisions. In this way, larger gaps between the
following vehicle in the target lane and the own position are required to satisfy the safety
constraint if the following vehicle is faster than the own speed. In contrast, lower values for
thegapareallowedifthefollowingvehicleisslower. Comparedtoconventionalgap-acceptance

===== PAGE 6 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 6
models this approach depends on gaps only indirectly, via the dependence on the longitudinal
acceleration. The assessment of the situation in terms of accelerations allows for the compact
formulation.
Moreover, by formulating the criterion in terms of safe braking decelerations of the longitu-
dinal model, crashes due to lane changes are automatically excluded. For realistic longitudinal
models, b should be well below the maximum possible deceleration b , which is about
safe max
9m/s2 on dry road surfaces. Notice that the maximum safe deceleration b prevents ac-
safe
cidents even in the case of totally selfish drivers as long as its value is not greater than the
maximum possible deceleration b of the underlying longitudinal model.
max
Increasing the value for b generally leads to stronger perturbations due to individual lane
safe
changes. But the braking reaction of the follower on the target lane is always limited by the
value of b . This is relevant in traffic simulations due to the fact that performing a lane
safe
change implies a discontinuous change in the input parameters for the acceleration function
for the new follower.
2.2 Incentive criterion for symmetric (’US’) lane-changing rules
The incentive criterion typically determines if a lane change improves the individual local
traffic situation of a driver. In our model, we generalize the incentive criterion to include the
immediately affected neighbors as well. The politeness factor p determines to which degree
these vehicles influence the lane-changing decision. For symmetric overtaking rules, we neglect
differences between the lanes and propose the following incentive condition for a lane-changing
decision of the driver of vehicle c:
a˜c ac+p a˜n an + a˜o ao > ∆a
th
. (3)
− − −
driver (cid:0)newfollower oldfollower(cid:1)
The first two terms denote the advantage (utility) of a possible lane change for the driver
| {z } | {z } | {z }
him- or herself, where a˜c refers to the new acceleration for vehicle c after a prospective lane
change. The considered lane change is favorable if the driver can accelerate more, i.e., go
faster in the new lane. The third term with the politeness factor p is the main innovation in
our model. It denotes the total advantage (acceleration gain or loss, if negative) of the two
immediately affected neighbors, weighted with p. Finally, the switching threshold ∆a on the
th
right-hand side of Eq. (??) models a certain inertia and prevents lane changes if the overall
advantage is only marginal compared to a ’keep lane’ directive. In summary, the incentive
criterion is fulfilled if the own advantage (acceleration gain) is higher than the weighted sum of
the disadvantages (acceleration losses) of the new and old successors and the threshold ∆a .1
th
Noticethatthethresholda influencesthelane-changingbehaviorglobally,whilethepoliteness
th
parameter affects the local lane-changing behavior depending on the involved neighbors.
The generalization to traffic on more than two lanes per direction is straightforward. If, for
a vehicle on a center lane, the incentive criterion is satisfied for both neighboring lanes, the
change is performed to the lane where the incentive is larger.
Since the disadvantages of other drivers and the own advantage are balanced via the polite-
ness factor p, the lane-changing model contains typical strategical features of classical game
1 NoticethatEq.(??)containsboththepossibilityandtheincentivetochangelanes. Evenforapolitenessp=0,
the condition makes sure that lane changes only take place if the distance to the next downstream vehicle
in the target lane is large enough to prevent a collision. Otherwise, the acceleration function would result
in an boundless braking deceleration. Therefore, this scenario is automatically excluded when comparing it
to the actual traffic situation in the current lane. However, for reasons of numerical efficiency, the safety
criterion (2) can be initially applied to a˜c as well.

===== PAGE 7 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 7
theory. The value of p can be interpreted as the degree of altruism. It can vary from p = 0
(for selfish lane-hoppers) to p > 1 for altruistic drivers who do not change if that would de-
teriorate the overall traffic situation considering the followers, while they would perform even
disadvantageous lane changes if this improves the situation of the followers sufficiently. By
setting p < 0, even malicious drivers could be modeled, who accept own disadvantages in order
to thwart others. In the special case p = 1 and ∆a = 0, the incentive criterion simplifies to
th
a˜c+a˜n+a˜o > ac+an+ao. (4)
Thus, lane changes are only performed when they increase the sum of accelerations of all
involved vehicles, which corresponds to the concept of ’Minimizing Overall Braking Induced
by Lane Changes’ (MOBIL) in the ideal sense. In this case, no additional safety constraint is
neededsinceabrakingmaneuverinordertoavoidanaccidentwouldbeautomaticallyexcluded
by Eq. (4) as long as the advantage in terms of the acceleration is lower than the disadvantage
in terms of the braking deceleration. Therefore, the ’ideal’ MOBIL strategy corresponding
to p = 1 has no free parameters and might therefore be considered as a ’minimal model’ for
lane-changing decisions. In Sec. 3, we investigate the rate of lane changes (per km and hour)
that is primarily determined by the politeness factor p.
2.3 Incentive criterion for asymmetric (’European’) passing rules
In most European countries, the driving rules for lane usage are restricted by legislation.
We now formulate an asymmetric lane-changing criterion for two-lane freeways and assume,
without loss of generality, that the right lane is the default lane, i.e., a ’keep-right’ directive is
implemented. A reformulation for left-oriented traffic describing, e.g., traffic rules in the UK
as well as generalizations to more than two lanes are straightforward. Specifically, we assume
the following ’European’ traffic rules:
(i) Passing rule: Passing on the right-hand lane is forbidden, unless traffic flow is congested,
in which case the symmetric rule (??) applies. We treat any vehicle driving at a velocity
below some suitably specified velocity v as driving in bound or congested traffic, e.g.,
crit
v = 60km/h.
crit
(ii) Lane usage rule: The right lane is the default lane. The left lane should only be used for
the purpose of overtaking.
We have implemented the passing rule by replacing the longitudinal dynamics on the right-
hand lane by the condition
ae c ur =
min(ac,a˜c) if vc > v˜
lead
> v
crit
,
(5)
a otherwise,
c
(cid:26)
where a˜c corresponds to the acceleration on the left lane and v˜
lead
denotes the velocity of
the front vehicle on the left-hand lane. The passing rule influences the acceleration on the
right-hand lane only (i) if there is no congested traffic (v˜ > v ), (ii) if the front vehicle
lead crit
on the left-hand lane is slower (vc > v˜
lead
), and (iii) if the acceleration a˜c for following this
vehicle would be lower than the single-lane acceleration ac in the actual situation. Notice that
the condition vc > v˜
lead
prevents that vehicles on the right-hand lane brake whenever they are
passed.
The ’keep-right’ directive of the lane-usage rule is implemented by a constant bias ∆a in
bias
addition to the threshold ∆a . Furthermore, we neglect the disadvantage of the successor in
th

===== PAGE 8 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 8
the right lane in Eq. (??), because the left lane has priority. Explicitly speaking, the resulting
asymmetric incentive criterion for lane changes from left (L) to right (R) reads
L R : a˜e c ur ac+p(a˜o ao) > ∆a th ∆a bias . (6)
→ − − −
Moreover, the incentive criterion for a lane change from right (R) to left (L) is given by
R L : a˜c ae c ur+p(a˜n an) > ∆a th +∆a bias . (7)
→ − −
Again, the quantities with a tilde refer to the new situation after a prospective lane change.
While the parameter ∆a is small, it clearly has to be larger than the threshold ∆a .
bias th
Otherwise, the switching threshold would prevent changes to the right-hand lane even on an
empty road.
Neglecting the follower on the right-hand lane leads to a different interpretation of the
politeness parameter p than for the symmetric rule. Via the politeness factor p, a driver on the
right lane considering a lane change to the left takes into account the disadvantage measured
in terms of the braking deceleration for the approaching vehicle on the target lane. This can
prevent the considered lane change even if the lane change is not critical, which is assured by
the safety criterion (2). This feature of the MOBIL lane-changing model reflects realistically a
far-seeing and anticipative driving behavior commonly observed for asymmetric passing rules.
Furthermore, taking into account only the follower of the faster (left) lane via the politeness
factor p applies a selective dynamic pressure on slow vehicles driving on the left lane in order
to let fast vehicles pass on the left lane, which is a frequently observed behavior on European
freeways, particularly on Germany freeways with their broad distribution of desired velocities.
Notice that the safety criterion prevents a critical lane change to the slower lane.
3 Application to multi-lane traffic simulations
Let us now apply the MOBIL concept to simulate two-lane freeway traffic with an on-ramp as
mergingzone. Sincetherulesareformulatedinamodel-independentwaybasedonlongitudinal
accelerations, we have to specify the underlying microscopic traffic model. In the following,
we will use the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) (Treiber et al., 2000), which is a simple car-
following model with descriptive parameters (Treiber, 2006).
The IDM acceleration v˙ of each vehicle α is a continuous function of the velocity vα, the net
distance gap sα, and the velocity difference ∆vα to the leading vehicle:
4 ∗ 2
vα s (vα,∆vα)
v˙α = a 1 . (8)
"
− v
0
− sα
#
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
This expression is a superposition of the acceleration v˙ (v) = a[1 (v/v )4] on a free road
free 0
and the braking deceleration v˙ (s,v,∆v) = a(s ∗ /s)2, when vehi − cle α comes too close to
int
−
the vehicle ahead. The deceleration term depends on the ratio between the effective ’desired
minimum gap’
v∆v
∗
s (v,∆v) = s +vT + (9)
0
2√ab
and the actual gap sα. The minimum distance s
0
in congested traffic is significant for low
velocities only. The main contribution in stationary traffic is the term vT, which corresponds
to following the leading vehicle with a constant ’safe time gap’ T. The last term is only
active in non-stationary traffic and implements an ’intelligent’ driving behavior including a

===== PAGE 9 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 9
braking strategy that, in nearly all situations, limits braking decelerations to the ’comfortable
deceleration’ b. Notice that the IDM guarantees crash-free driving.
Thelane-changingbehaviordoesnotonlydependonthelane-changingandthecar-following
model, but also on the heterogeneity of the vehicle-driver units. Particularly, for identical
vehicle-driver units, a stationary state would be reached soon. To avoid this artifact, we have
introduced heterogeneity by implementing two types of vehicles. The slower ’trucks’ differ in
their reduced desired velocity v = 80km/h compared to the faster ’cars’ (v = 120km/h).
0 0
Apart from different desired velocities for the vehicle type, we have also uniformly distributed
the desired velocity with a variation of 20% for each single vehicle in order to increase the
±
degree of heterogeneity. For our simulations, we use the following IDM parameters: The time
gap is set to T = 1.2s, the maximum acceleration to a = 1.5m/s2, the desired deceleration
to b = 2 m/s2, and the minimum distance to s = 2m. Furthermore, the vehicle length is
0
assumed to be 4 m for cars and 12 m for trucks. In addition, we assumed a truck fraction of
20%. The values of the MOBIL parameters used in the simulations are listed in Table 1.
The incentive criterion is evaluated in each numerical update step in the simulation, i.e.,
the drivers continuously check their incentives. If a lane change is favorable and safe, the
lane change is performed immediately and the transition from the present lane to the target
lane is neglected. Notice that the acceleration will be discontinuous for the considered vehicle,
and also for the old and new successors. However, as the velocity is given by integrating
the acceleration, the velocities of all vehicles (and the accelerations of all other vehicles not
directly involved in the lane change) remain continuous. We checked the simulation results
for the different numerical update steps ∆t = 0.25, 0.1 and 0.01s and found only a marginal
quantitative difference with respect to lane-changing rates. Furthermore, the multi-lane model
combination of IDM and MOBIL is mathematically consistent in the sense that the numerical
results for a limited simulation period converge in the limit ∆t 0s. For the following
→
simulations, we used an explicit numerical update of ∆t = 0.25s.
When evaluating the MOBIL accelerations for the old and new followers, one has, in prin-
ciple, the freedom to evaluate the accelerations using the own model parameter set or that
of the respective successors. Clearly, using the driving parameters of the followers is in line
with the reasoning behind MOBIL, although they are not directly observable by the driver
initiating a lane change. However, strong clues are given to the driver both by the vehicle type
(truck, family car, sports car) and by the past driving style. Therefore, we evaluate all MOBIL
accelerations with the model parameters of the respective successors.
3.1 Spatial distribution of the lane-changing rate
In this section, we apply the proposed lane-changing model to the simulations of discretionary
and mandatory lane changes. To this end, we have simulated a two-lane road section of
10km length with open boundary conditions. For an open system, the inflow at the upstream
boundary is the natural control parameter. The inflow at the upstream boundary has been
kept constant at 1000vehicles/h/lane. Furthermore, we have assumed an on-ramp (merging
length 300 m) at the location x = 7.5 km with a constant inflow of 500vehicles/h.
Themandatory mergefromtheon-ramptotherightlaneofthefreewayismodeledbya’vir-
tual vehicle’ standing at the end of the merging lane. Due to the imposed deceleration to avoid
a collision, the attractiveness of the merging lane automatically decreases, and, consequently
the incentive to merge to the freeway increases, when approaching the standing vehicle. To
favor lane-changing in this situation, we assume an egoistic behavior for the merging vehicle
in the weaving lane by setting p = 0.

===== PAGE 10 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 10
Table 1: Parameters of the MOBIL lane-changing model. The politeness parameter p of the incentive
criterionmainlydeterminesthelane-changingrate. Thechangingthreshold∆ath preventslanechanges
of marginal advantage. For p < 1, the maximum safe deceleration bsafe serves as additional safety
criterion. The value of bsafe is chosen considerably below the physically possible maximum deceleration
2
ofabout9m/s ondryroads. Inthecaseofasymmetric(’European’)lane-changingrules,theadditional
bias ∆abias models a preferred lane-usage of the default lane. The values are used in the simulations
in combination with the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM). Notice that lane-changing properties and,
consequently, the values depend on the respective longitudinal traffic model.
Parameter Value
Politeness Factor p 0 ...1
Changing threshold ∆a 0.1 m/s2
th
Maximum safe deceleration b 4 m/s2
safe
Bias for right lane ∆a 0.3 m/s2
bias
The impact of the on-ramp on the lane-changing behavior with symmetric rules is displayed
in a spatiotemporal diagram of the lane-changing events in Fig. 2 (upper row) for a politeness
factor p = 1. The displayed lane-changing events from the right to the left lane, and from the
left to the right lane express clearly the inhomogeneity of the road section. As expected, the
local lane-changing rate is increased near the on-ramp located at x = 7.5km. The on-ramp
induces a locally strongly increased activity of discretionary lane changes from the right to the
left lane, while the number of lane changes from the left to the right is reduced. Since vehicles
merge from the on-ramp to the right lane of the freeway, the right lane becomes less attractive
for vehicles on the freeway upstream the merging zone. Therefore, the incentive to change to
the left lane is locally increased.
This observation is displayed in the distribution of lane-changing events as a function of
space. The diagrams in the lower row of Fig. 2 show the lane-changing rates for simulations
with politeness factors p = 0 and p = 1. The lane-changing rate measures the performed lane
changes per kilometer and hour. The simulations for different values of p show the same form
of the spatial distribution: The lane-changing rate is nearly homogeneously distributed up-
and downstream the on-ramp. In a range of about 500m around the center of the on-ramp at
x = 7.5km, the number of lane changes to the left lane is increased by approximately a factor
of 4, while the changes to the right lane are slightly reduced. This demonstrates the strong
dependence of the lane-changing behavior due to spatial inhomogeneities of the road section.
The relative increase is even higher for ’polite’ drivers (p = 1) compared to the simulated
’egoistic’ behavior referring to p = 0. Notice that the lane-changing rate is slightly increased
downstream the on-ramp because of the increased traffic density, see the following section.
3.2 Lane-changing rate
Let us now investigate the lane-changing rate as a function of the traffic density. A method
to measure locally the lane-changing rate and the traffic density in a microscopic simulation
is as follows: The road is divided into subsections, e.g., of length ∆x = 1km, and time is
divided into time intervals of durations ∆t = 1min. For each spatiotemporal element ∆x∆t
obtained in this way, the number n of lane changes and the average density ρ is determined.

===== PAGE 11 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 11
9
8.5
8
7.5
7
6.5
6
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
)mk(
x
noitisoP
Lane-changing events from right to left lane (p=1)
9
8.5
8
7.5
7
6.5
6
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Time t (min)
)mk(
x
noitisoP
Lane-changing events from left to right lane (p=1)
Time t (min)
2000
1500
1000
500
0
6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9
)mk
h/1(
stneve
gnignahc-enaL
2000
(a) Politness Factor p=0 Right to Left
Left to Right
1500
1000
500
0
6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9
Position x (km)
)mk
h/1(
stneve
gnignahc-enaL
(b) Politness Factor p=1 Right to Left
Left to Right
Position x (km)
Figure 2: (Upper row) Spatiotemporal diagrams of the lane-changing events from the right to the left
laneandviceversaforsymmetriclane-changingrulesandapolitenessfactorofp=1. Eachlanechange
isdisplayedasadot. Thetrafficdemandsare1000vehicles/h/laneonthemainroadand500vehicles/h
on the on-ramp. (Lower row) Distributions of the lane-changing rate as a function of space for p = 0
and p=1.

===== PAGE 12 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 12
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
))mk
h(/1(
etar
gnignahc-enaL
(a) Symmetric lane-changing rules
Politness factor p=0 x=5.5 km 1600
x=7.5 km
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
))mk
h(/1(
etar
gnignahc-enaL
(b) Asymmetric lane-changing rules
Politness factor p=0 x=5.5 km
x=7.5 km
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
))mk
h(/1(
etar
gnignahc-enaL
(c) Symmetric lane-changing rules
Politness factor p=1 x=5.5 km 1600
x=7.5 km
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
))mk
h(/1(
etar
gnignahc-enaL
(d) Asymmetric lane-changing rules
Politness factor p=1 x=5.5 km
x=7.5 km
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
Figure 3: Lane-changing rates for symmetric (’US’) and asymmetric (’European’) lane-changing rules
as a function of traffic density. In the simulations, the politeness parameter has been considered for
values of p = 0 and p = 1. Furthermore, the diagrams show the lane-changing rates measured in the
roadsections[5,6]kmand[7,8]kmofthe10kmroadstretch. Asshowninthediagrams, themaximum
lane-changing rate is mainly determined by the politeness factor. An on-ramp at location x = 7.5km
with a merging zone of 300m increases the lane-changes locally.
The lane-changing rate is then given by
n
r(ρ) = . (10)
∆x∆t
Finally, we average over all lane-changing rates belonging to the same density interval. Taking
different values of ∆x, ∆t, or ∆ρ have not changed the results qualitatively.
We have run multiple simulations of the scenario presented in the previous section with
inflows varying from 100 vehicles/h/lane up to 1800 vehicles/h/lane and a constant ramp flow
of Q = 500 vehicles/h. The resulting lane-changing rates for politeness factors of p = 0 and
rmp
p = 1 and for symmetric and asymmetric lane-changing rules are shown in Fig. 3. The results
for the considered road sections around x = 5.5km and x = 7.5km of length 1km displayed
in Fig. 3 show the following characteristics:
The lane-changing rates increase for traffic densities 1km/lane < ρ < 10/km/lane. A
•
more detailed analysis revealed a quadratic slope at the origin for small densities.
The maximum lane-changing rates are reached for intermediate densities. The maximum
•
is located between 10/km/lane (for p = 1 and asymmetric rules), and 15/km/lane (other
cases).

===== PAGE 13 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 13
The peak value depends strongly on the value of the politeness parameter. For p =
•
0, the maximum lane-changing rate is about 1100/h/km (1400/h/km) for symmetric
(asymmetric) rules. For p = 1, the maximum lane-changing rate is only 600 (450)
vehicles/h/km approximately. Further simulations show that already a positive value
p > 0 reduces the maximum number of lane changes significantly.
With increasing density, velocity differences between neighboring lanes are reduced.
•
Thus, the lane-changing rates decrease.
For density values around 30vehicles/km/lane, the lane-changing rates on the homoge-
•
neous road section around x = 5.5km are negligible because changing lanes is no more
profitableorpossibleduetoalackofsuitablegaps. Thiscouldbeattributedtoa’moving
like a solid block’ effect proposed by Helbing and Huberman (1998).
The curves of the lane-changing rates measured at the homogeneous road section located
•
aroundx = 5.5kmandthesectionatx = 7.5kmincludingthemergingareashowsimilar
shapes. Due to the slower vehicles merging from the on-ramp to the freeway, the lane-
changing rate is systematically shifted to higher values (cf. the previous section). Notice
that, for high traffic densities, the lane-changing rate does not drop to zero. There are
still about 100–200 lane changes per hour and kilometer. This agrees with the findings
in Sparmann (1978).
The politeness parameter p is the most important parameter determining the lane-changing
rate. However, let us discuss the influence of the other MOBIL parameters as well. The
lane-changing threshold ∆a influences the peak of the curve weakly, but does not change
th
r(ρ) qualitatively. For example, increasing ∆a from 0.1 to 0.3m/s2 reduces the maximum
th
number of lane changes by approximately 100/h/km. Moreover, the influence of the maximum
safe deceleration b is negligible within a reasonable range of braking accelerations from
safe
8m/s2 to b as the IDM braking strategy limits braking decelerations to the ’comfortable
− −
deceleration’ b in nearly all situations Treiber et al. (2000). Notice that for the special case
p = 1, the safety criterion is even dispensable as discussed in Sec. 2.1.
Let us finally discuss the mean velocities as a function of traffic density corresponding to
the lane-changing rates shown in Fig. 3 of the open system. In the simulations, we have im-
plemented ’virtual’ cross sections in order to aggregate the data with 1-min sampling intervals
mimicking real-world double-loop detector measurements. For each sample interval, we have
recorded the lane-resolved traffic flow Qi and determined the arithmetic velocity averages Vi.
The density ρ was calculated by the hydrodynamic relation Q = ρV from the lane-averaged
L L
quantities Q =
i=1
Qi and V =
i=1
(QiVi)/Q for the road consisting of L = 2 lanes. To
facilitate the discussion, we have suppressed the fluctuations in the velocities occurring in the
P P
1-min data by averaging over all data belonging to the same density class (of class width
∆ρ = 2/km/lane).
Figure 4 shows the velocities of the left and the right lane measured with a detector located
at x = 5km for symmetric and asymmetric lane-changing rules and for politeness settings
p = 0 and p = 1. In the simulations, traffic is always free with speeds about V 65km/h.
≥
For symmetric lane-changing rules without any bias, the velocity is primarily synchronized in
all lanes for all densities due to the lack of any lane preference, see Fig. 4(a). In contrast,
the difference of average velocities in different lanes in free traffic, Fig. 4(b), is a consequence
of explicitly asymmetric lane-changing rules modeled by the parameter a in combination
bias
with the passing rule (5). The initially equally distributed trucks are mostly found on the

===== PAGE 14 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 14
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
)h/mk(
yticoleV
naeM
(a) Symmetric lane-changing rules
130
Detector at 5 km p=0, left lane p=0, right lane 120
p=1, left lane
p=1, right lane
110
100
90
80
70
60
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
)h/mk(
yticoleV
naeM
(b) Asymmetric lane-changing rules
p=0, left lane Detector at 5 km p=0, right lane
p=1, left lane
p=1, right lane
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
Figure4: Lane-resolvedvelocitiesaveragedfromdouble-loopdetectorsamplesof1minatacrosssection
x = 5km for symmetric (a) and asymmetric (b) MOBIL rules. The simulation results correspond to
the lane-changing rates shown in Fig. 3 for politeness factors p = 0 and p = 1. Notice the different
vertical scale in both diagrams.
right-most lane. The separation results in a different velocity-density relation for the fast (left)
lane and the slow (right) lane as shown in Fig. 4(b). For both lane-changing scenarios, the
velocity differences decrease with increasing traffic density.
The influence of the politeness factor p leads to the following findings:
For symmetric lane-changing behavior, the ’altruistic’ lane-changing behavior corre-
•
sponding to p = 1 increases the mean speed of both lanes for traffic densities of about
ρ 20/km/lane. Therefore, the suppression of disadvantageous lane changes for the
≤
direct environment (Eq. (4)) improves the overall traffic performance. In contrast, an
’egoistic’ lane-changing behavior (p = 0) results (in average) in higher travel times.
For asymmetric MOBIL rules, the lane-changing behavior corresponding to p = 1 leads
•
to more articulate velocity differences between the lanes. While the speed in the passing
(left) lane is higher than in the case for p = 0, the slow (right) lane gets slower. Notice
that these variations only occur for intermediate traffic densities, i.e., when lane changes
lead to interactions between vehicles in neighboring lanes. When a vehicle-driver unit
considers to change to the fast lane, the disadvantage of the follower in the target lane
is included (and weighted) by the politeness factor. An unselfish driver, therefore, stays
in the slower lane to avoid the perturbation of the faster vehicles in the left lane. As a
consequence, the lane-changing rate is reduced (see Fig. 3), and velocity differences in
the right lane decreases as well.
However, for symmetric and asymmetric MOBIL rules, the differences between the lane-
•
changing behavior for different p settings disappear for densities ρ > 20/km/lane. This
result is consistent with the measured lane-changing rate, cf. Fig. 3, as the number of
lane changes decrease with increasing density due to a lack of suitable gaps independent
from the value of the politeness.
4 Conclusions and outlook
Lane-changing models are an important component of microscopic traffic simulation software.
Most of the published and implemented lane-changing models follow a rule-based approach

===== PAGE 15 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 15
with different gap-acceptance conditions and, consequently, different lane-changing behavior
for various situations. Due to the multiplicity of possible driving conditions associated with
discretionaryandmandatorylanechanges,thisapproachoftentendstoleadtocomplexmodels
with many parameters.
In this paper, we have presented the general concept MOBIL defining lane-changing models
for a broad class of car-following models. The basic idea of MOBIL is to measure both the
attractiveness of a given lane, i.e., its utility, and the risk associated with lane changes in
terms of accelerations. This means, both the incentive criterion and the safety constraint can
be expressed in terms of the acceleration function of the underlying car-following model, which
allows for an efficient and compact formulation of the lane-changing model with only a small
number of additional parameters. As a consequence, the properties of the car-following model,
e.g., any dependence on relative velocities or the exclusion of collisions are transfered to the
lane-changing behavior. Moreover, the model is able to describe mandatory and discretionary
lane changes as well as symmetric and asymmetric lane changing behavior in a unified and
consistent way.
As a novel feature, our model takes into account other drivers via a politeness factor p. The
politeness factor characterizes the degree of ’passive’ cooperativeness among drivers, i.e., the
subject vehicle makes a decision by considering its effects on other drivers. More specifically,
evenadvantageouslanechangeswillnotbeperformedifthepersonaladvantageissmallerthan
the disadvantage to the traffic environment, multiplied by p. Furthermore, a ’pushy’ driver
is able to initiate a lane change of his or her leader, which is a commonly observed driving
behavior in countries with asymmetric lane-changing rules and dedicated passing lanes.
The MOBIL concept has only few parameters and each parameter is associated with an
intuitive meaning. The safety criterion is simply described by a critical acceleration thresh-
old b . The threshold a prevents lane-changing yielding only a marginal advantage. For
safe th
the asymmetric incentive criterion, an additional bias parameter a differentiates between
bias
default and passing lanes. The optional politeness parameter p weights the accelerations and
decelerations of the vehicles directly affected by a lane change. The parameters b ,a and
safe th
a aregiveninunitsoftheaccelerationandaredirectlymeasurablequantities. Therefore,the
bias
model parameters could be calibrated by using highly resolved trajectory data (Hoogendoorn
et al., 2003; NGSIM, 2006). Moreover, the politeness factor can also be empirically tested and
measured by comparing the situation before and after the lane change for the affected vehicles.
We have investigated the lane-changing rate by means of simulation in an open system with
an on-ramp in combination with the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) leading to deterministic
lane-changing behavior. The lane-changing rate is mainly determined by the politeness factor
p,butdependsalsoontheconsideredlocationoftheroadsection. Asshowninthesimulations,
the lane-changing rate is locally increased at the location of an road inhomogeneity, which is
related to mandatory lane changes. In order to investigate the role of ’critical’ lane changes in
increasing the breakdown probability, one could vary the safety threshold b . A more generic
safe
stochastic approach would be based on a car-following model that takes explicitly into account
perception errors that lead to a subjective estimate for the utility and safety of a lane change
(Treiber et al., 2006).
Obviously, research into empirical justification and model calibration and validation is the
next step using highly resolved trajectory data (Hoogendoorn et al., 2003; NGSIM, 2006).
However, the empirical investigation of lane-changing behavior is even more difficult than the
car-following behavior because more vehicles are involved, the situations are more singular due
to the overlap of the strategic, tactical, and operational behavior, and, finally, the intra- and
inter-driver differences will play even a stronger role as for the longitudinal behavior (Ossen

===== PAGE 16 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 16
et al., 2006). The diversity of the drivers could be represented in a microscopic simulation
by statistically distributed values for the MOBIL parameters, particularly for the politeness
parameter.
Furthermore, extensions of the proposed acceleration-based concept to other traffic-related
decision processes are possible as well. For example, when approaching a traffic light that
switches from green to yellow, one has to decide whether to stop in front of the signal, or still
to pass it. In the framework of MOBIL, the ’stop’ decision will be based on the safe braking
deceleration b . Similar considerations apply when deciding whether it is safe enough to
safe
cross an unsignalized intersection (Helbing et al., 2005), to turn into another road in a ’yield
situation’, or to start an overtaking maneuver on the opposite lane of a two-way rural road.
Finally, we emphasize that MOBIL is meant to represent only the last ’operational’ decision
whether to immediately perform a lane change or not. In reality, a lane-changing decision also
includes strategical and tactical aspects in preparation for this final step, which are relevant
particularlyforcongestedtrafficandformandatorylanechanges. Forexample, tacticalbehav-
ior may involve accelerations (or decelerations) of the own vehicle or of vehicles in the target
lane in preparation for a lane change, which corresponds to ’active’ cooperation between the
drivers. This ’longitudinal-transverse coupling’ will be the subject of a forthcoming paper.
Acknowledgments:
The authors would like to thank for partial support by the Volkswagen AG within the BMBF
project INVENT.
References
Ahmed, K. I., 1999. Modeling drivers’ acceleration and lane change behavior. Ph.D. thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Bando, M., Hasebe, K., Nakayama, A., Shibata, A., Sugiyama, Y., 1995. Dynamical model of
traffic congestion and numerical simulation. Phys. Rev. E 51, 1035–1042.
Belexius, S., 1968. An extended model for car-following. Transportation Research 2 (1), 13–21.
Brackstone, M., McDonald, M., 1996. The microscopic modelling of traffic flow: Weaknesses
and potential developments. In: Wolf, D. E., Schreckenberg, M., Bachem, A. (Eds.), Traffic
and Granular Flow. World Scientific, Singapore, pp. 151–165.
Brackstone, M., McDonald, M., Wu, J., 1998. Lane changing on the motorway: Factors affect-
ing its occurrence, and their implications. In: Proc. of the 9th Int. Conf. on Road Trans-
portation Information and Control. Conference Publication No. 454, London, pp. 160–164.
Coifman,B.,Krishnamurthy,S.,Wang,X.,2005.Lane-changingmaneuversconsumingfreeway
capacity. In: Hoogendoorn, S., Luding, S., Bovy, P., Schreckenberg, M., Wolf, D. (Eds.),
Traffic and Granular Flow ’03. Springer, Berlin, pp. 3–14.
Gipps, P. G., 1986. A model for the structure of lane-changing decisions. Transportation Re-
search 20B, 403–414.
Halati,A.,Lieu,H.,Walker,S.,1997.Corsim-corridortrafficsimulationmodel.In: Benekohal,
R. F. (Ed.), Proceedings of the Traffic Congestion and Traffic Safety in the 21th Century
Conference. ASCE, New York, pp. 570–576.

===== PAGE 17 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 17
Helbing, D., 2001. Traffic and related self-driven many-particle systems. Reviews of Modern
Physics 73, 1067–1141.
Helbing, D., Huberman, B. A., 1998. Coherent moving states in highway traffic. Nature 396,
738–740.
Helbing, D., Jiang, R., Treiber, M., 2005.Analyticalinvestigation ofoscillationsinintersecting
flows of pedestrian and vehicle traffic. Phys. Rev. E 72, 046130.
Helly, W., 1959. Simulation of bottlenecks in single lane traffic flow. In: General Motors Re-
search Loratories (Ed.), Proceedings of the Symposium on the Theory of Traffic Flow. Else-
vier, New York, pp. 207–238.
Hidas, P., 2005. Modelling vehicle interactions in microscopic traffic simulation of merging and
weaving. Transportation Research C 13, 37–62.
Hidas, P., Wagner, P., 2004. Review of data collection methods for microscopic traffic simula-
tion. In: World Conference on Transport Research. WCTR, Istanbul, Turkey.
Hoogendoorn, S. P., Zuylen, H. J. V., Schreuder, M., Gorte, B., Vosselman, G., 2003. Mi-
croscopic traffic data collection by remote sensing. Transportation Research Record 1855,
121–128.
Jiang,R., Wu, Q.,Zhu, Z.,2001.Fullvelocitydifferencemodelforacar-followingtheory.Phys.
Rev. E 64, 017101.
Laval, J. A., Daganzo, C. F., 2004. Multi-lane hybrid traffic flow model: Quantifying the
impacts of lane-changing maneuvers on traffic flow.
Laval, J. A., Daganzo, C. F., 2006. Lane-changing in traffic streams. Transportation Research
Part B 40 (3), 251–264.
Lenz, H., Wagner, C., Sollacher, R., 1999. Multi-anticipative car-following model. European
Physical Journal B 7, 331–335.
Nagatani, T., 2002. The physics of traffic jams. Reports of Progress in Physics 65, 1331–1386.
Nagel, K., Wolf, D., Wagner, P., Simon, P., 1998. Two-lane traffic rules for cellular automata:
A systematic approach. Phys. Rev. E 58, 1425–1437.
NGSIM, 2006. Next Generation Simulation. Department of Transportation,
www.http://ngsim.fhwa.dot.gov.
Ossen, S. J., Hoogendoorn, S. P., Gorte, B. G., 2006. Inter-driver differencesin carfollowing: a
vehicle trajectory based study. Vol. Paper 06-1028. Transportation Research Board Annual
Meeting, Washington, D.C.
Skabardonis, A., 2002. Simulation of freeway weaving areas. Transportation Research Record
1802, 115–124.
Sparmann, U., 1978. Spurwechselvorga¨nge auf zweispurigen BAB-Richtungsfahrbahnen. In:
Forschung, Straßenbau und Straßenverkehrstechnik. Vol. 263. Bundesminister fu¨r Verkehr,
Bonn-Bad Godesberg.

===== PAGE 18 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 18
Toledo, T., Choudhury, C. F., Ben-Akiva, M. E., 2005. Lane-changing model with explicit
targetlanechoice.Transportation ResearchRecord: Journalof the Transportation Research
Board 1934, 157–165.
Toledo, T., Koutsopoulos, H. N., Ben-Akiva, M. E., 2003. Modeling integrated lane-changing
behavior. Transportation Research Record 1857, 30–38.
Treiber, M., 2006. The website http://www.traffic-simulation.de provides an interactive
simulation of the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) in combination with the lane-changing
model MOBIL.
Treiber, M., Hennecke, A., Helbing, D., 2000.Congestedtrafficstatesinempiricalobservations
and microscopic simulations. Phys. Rev. E 62, 1805–1824.
Treiber, M., Kesting, A., Helbing, D., 2006. Delays, inaccuracies and anticipation in micro-
scopic traffic models. Physica A 360, 71–88.
Wei,H.,Lee,J.,Li,Q.,Li,C.J.,2000.Observation-basedlane-vehicle-assignmenthierarchyfor
microscopic simulation on an urban street network. Transportation Research Record 1710,
96–103.
Yang, Q., Koutsopoulos, H. N., 1996. A microscopic traffic simulator for evaluation of dynamic
traffic management systems. Transportation Research C 4 (3), 113.
Yousif, S., Hunt, J., December 1995. Modelling lane utilization on British dual-carriageway
roads: effects on lane-changing. Traffic Engineering + Control 36 (12), 680 – 687.
