===== PAGE 1 =====

UC Berkeley
Recent Work
Title
Developing Transportation Response Strategies for Wildfire Evacuations via an Empirically
Supported Traffic Simulation of Berkeley, California
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/70p6k4rf
Authors
Zhao, Bingyu
Wong, Stephen D
Publication Date
2021-08-10
DOI
10.1177/03611981211030271
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

===== PAGE 2 =====

Developing Transportation Response Strategies for Wildfire
Evacuations via an Empirically Supported Traffic Simulation of
Berkeley, California
Pre-Print
Transportation Research Record
August 2021
https://doi.org/10.1177/03611981211030271
Bingyu Zhao, Ph.D.
UC Berkeley
Stephen D. Wong, Ph.D.
UC Berkeley
University of Alberta
Note: Small differences in language will exist between this version and the final published
journal article

===== PAGE 3 =====

Zhao and Wong 2
Developing Transportation Response Strategies for Wildfire Evacuations via
an Empirically Supported Traffic Simulation of Berkeley, California
Bingyu Zhao
Postdoctoral Researcher
University of California, Berkeley
Civil and Environmental Engineering
Berkeley, California 94720
Email: bz247@berkeley.edu
Stephen D. Wong
Incoming Assistant Professor
University of Alberta
Civil and Environmental Engineering
Email: stephenwong@ualberta.ca
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3638-3651
Published Online: August 10, 2021
Funding Statement: SB 1 grant from the University of California Institute of Transportation
Studies, the Graduate Research Fellowship Program (National Science Foundation), and the
Dwight D. Eisenhower Transportation Fellowship Program (Federal Highway Administration).
Open-source Code: https://github.com/cb-cities/spatial_queue

===== PAGE 4 =====

Zhao and Wong 3
ABSTRACT
Government agencies must make rapid and informed decisions in wildfires to safely evacuate
people. However, current evacuation simulation tools for resource-strapped agencies largely fail
to compare possible transportation responses or incorporate empirical evidence from past
wildfires. Consequently, we employ online survey data from evacuees of the 2017 Northern
California Wildfires (n=37), the 2017 Southern California Wildfires (n=175), and the 2018 Carr
Wildfire (n=254) to inform a policy-oriented traffic evacuation simulation model. We test our
simulation for a hypothetical wildfire evacuation in the wildland urban interface (WUI) of
Berkeley, California. We focus on variables including fire speed, departure time distribution,
towing of items, transportation mode, GPS-enabled rerouting, phased evacuations (i.e., allowing
higher-risk residents to leave earlier), and contraflow (i.e., switching all lanes away from danger).
We found that reducing household vehicles (i.e., to 1 vehicle per household) and increasing GPS-
enabled rerouting (e.g., 50% participation) lowered exposed vehicles (i.e., total vehicles in the fire
frontier) by over 50% and evacuation time estimates (ETEs) by about 30% from baseline. Phased
evacuations with a suitable time interval reduced exposed vehicles most significantly (over 90%)
but produced a slightly longer ETEs. Both contraflow (on limited links due to resource constraints)
and slowing fire speed were effective in lowering exposed vehicles (around 50%), but not ETEs.
Extended contraflow can reduce both exposed vehicles and ETEs. We recommend agencies
develop a communication and parking plan to reduce the number of evacuating vehicles, create
and communicate a phased evacuation plan, and build partnerships with GPS-routing services.
Keywords: Evacuations, Traffic Simulation, California Wildfires, Transportation Policy,
Behavior, Contraflow, Phased Evacuations

===== PAGE 5 =====

Zhao and Wong 4
1. INTRODUCTION
Recent large-scale wildfire evacuations in California have exposed significant challenges for
governments in increasing evacuation compliance, decreasing congestion, and ensuring equity. In
many of these events, public agencies (e.g., transportation, transit, emergency management) lacked
resources to deploy for a transportation response (1). These challenges are likely to extend to other
wildland-urban interface (WUI) evacuations across North America. Without adequate funding,
staff, and research ability, governments need practice-ready strategies to successfully evacuate
residents in wildfires. One positive direction in the field has been the development of wildfire
evacuation models, including traffic simulation models (2) that have sometimes been coupled with
fire spread models and trigger buffer models (e.g., (3)). Despite these new integrated models, two
key limitations remain in the wildfire evacuation simulation field. First, choice-making and
behavior (e.g., transportation mode choice, destination choice) in wildfire evacuation simulations
is often assumed or estimated based on expert knowledge, not actual behavior from post-disaster
surveys or data. Second, traffic simulations for wildfires often fail to compare transportation
strategies for evacuations. Effective and cost-efficient policies are crucial for ensuring safe
evacuations.
To begin addressing these two key limitations, we developed several research questions:
1. What behavioral assumptions in simulations could be replaced by previously collected
evacuation data?
2. What key factors should be integrated into traffic simulations to balance realism,
computational complexity, and generalizability?
3. What transportation responses/strategies could be simulated and how might
responses/strategies differ?
To answer these questions, we developed a spatial-queue-based traffic simulation that integrates
post-disaster wildfire survey data from three wildfires - the 2017 Northern California Wildfires,
the 2017 Southern California Wildfires, and the 2018 Carr Wildfire - for several evacuation
choices. Using this simulation, we compare and contrast different fire speeds, departure times,
towing demand, transportation mode splits, rerouting participation rates (i.e., GPS-guided routing
based on real-time traffic conditions), phased evacuation times (i.e., time-based zone releases of
evacuees), and contraflow options (e.g., switching all lanes to evacuate away from the fire). These
fire behavior and policy parameters are tested in hypothetical wildfire incidents in the Berkeley
Hills. We investigate the results for each scenario and provide recommendations for the different
responses and strategies.
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Wildfire and No-Notice Evacuation Behavior
During wildfire evacuations, individuals must make a number of complex choices including their
decision to evacuate or stay/defend, departure timing, transportation mode, route choice,
shelter/accommodation type, destination, and reentry timing. The wildfire evacuation behavior
literature (see review in (4)) has focused predominantly on the decision to evacuate or stay (5,6).
In many cases (e.g., (7,8)), this literature employs discrete choice models to isolate influential
variables in the decision to evacuate or stay including defending behavior of property (see (9) for
more work on alternatives to evacuations). One important improvement over the years has been

===== PAGE 6 =====

Zhao and Wong 5
the collection of post-disaster wildfire evacuation survey data to inform these models, e.g., (6–
8,10,11,1). However, much less work has focused on decisions during the evacuation process (e.g.,
route, destination) (11,12), as noted in (13). Other work, such as (14), notes that behavior such as
extra-trip making, mobilization time, and background traffic can also impact evacuations.
Moreover, alternative transportation strategies such as the sharing economy (e.g. (15–17)) may be
feasible under certain wildfire evacuation circumstances, changing the potential modal split and
sometimes increasing social equity. Altogether, the literature lacks in several areas: 1) fully
understanding evacuee behavior, and 2) having enough survey data for most or all choices in
wildfire evacuations. In addition, survey data has yet to be fully integrated into evacuation
simulation models as behavioral variables are currently created via assumptions, expert opinions,
and/or hypothesized statistical distributions.
Apart from the wildfire specific studies referenced above, no-notice or short-notice evacuation
under other types of hazards (e.g., truck attack, flash flood, or general emergency situations) have
long attracted researchers’ attention (18–21). Research in this area can be categorized into two
types. The first type focuses on understanding the evacuation demand, such as participation rates,
origin locations, departure times, and destination locations (22). The second type analyzes
operational strategies to accomplish the evacuation safely and efficiently (23). On the demand side,
compared to early, self-organized evacuations, no- or short-notice evacuations are often
characterized by excess levels of stress and uncertainties associated with dire situations (20,24).
As a result, evacuees’ behaviors might differ from their response to long-notice evacuations. In
addition, short-notice evacuations also have distinct phases (e.g., anticipation, warning,
displacement, notification, and return and recovery) (24). Different evacuation behaviors are
associated with each phase. Surveys and statistical models have been used to elicit qualitative and
quantitative insights on the evacuation behavior parameters, such as the reasons and ratios of
people choosing to stay in shelters, hotels, or with family/friends (22,24). It is also recognized that
different behavior parameters are interconnected and correlated, and models with correlation
structures have been used to capture their joint distribution (22). On the operational side,
challenges for safely evacuating people correspond to traffic assignment tasks, with some
additional features and constraints. Different algorithms have been used to optimize the evacuation
process, from bus scheduling, to family trip-chain arrangements, to optimum traffic assignment
(21,23,25).
2.2 Wildfire Evacuation Strategies
Wildfire evacuation strategies have been largely developed following guidance and lessons learned
from other types of disasters (e.g., hurricanes, tsunamis). The focus of most strategies for wildfire
evacuations has been on evacuation efficiency (e.g., reducing evacuation time estimates [ETEs] or
total travel time), given the speed and short notice of wildfires. Generally, these metrics are aimed
to 1) improve the network capacity through strategies of contraflow (e.g., switching some or all
lanes of a roadway to flow away from a hazard) or new infrastructure or 2) optimize the utilization
of the network by evacuees through strategies such as phased evacuation, which reduces peak
demand on the roadway by spreading out evacuees temporally. Some examples in literature offer
more details of how the strategies can be implemented in a wildfire evacuation context. Contraflow
was studied in (14), where locations were determined by iteratively turning the excess road
capacity in the opposite direction of road links. (26) proposed a phased-evacuation strategy where
those closer to danger should leave first (Innermost First Out, InFO), while (27) tested all phase

===== PAGE 7 =====

Zhao and Wong 6
sequences in a road network with four evacuation zones. A lane-based intersection-control plan
was proposed in (28) to reduce crossing and merging conflicts at intersections for wildfire
evacuations. However, one key limitation of many of these strategies is the need for a significant
amount of personnel and coordination to implement (e.g., intersection control in (29)). Moreover,
some metrics to determine strategy efficiency can be misleading as ETEs are sensitive to the
departure of the last vehicle from the evacuation zone (30). Despite work on different
transportation strategies in evacuations (63), a comprehensive study that compares relative gains
of each type of strategy specifically for wildfire evacuation remains absent from the literature.
2.3 Wildfire Evacuation Simulations and Strategies
Traffic modeling and simulations have been widely used to test wildfire evacuation scenarios and
strategies (Table 1), from simple hypothetical network (27,29), to small communities with tens to
hundreds of households (31,32) to a large town/city (33). Most studies run off-the-shelf
microscopic simulation software, such as SUMO (33) and Paramics (29,31). Certain non-
microsimulation quick calculations are also proven to be useful in estimating the evacuation delays
and finding bottlenecks, such as the simplified manual calculations in (29) and adjusted four-step
models used by (14). Model inputs (network and travel demand) are usually sourced from a variety
of venues, such as the OpenStreetMap (OSM), digitized aerial imagery, planning documents, and
census data. Vehicles follow either a fixed route to the closest exits or routes that periodically
update based on evolving traffic conditions during the evacuation. Probably due to the complexity
of the problem as well as the emerging nature of the evacuation process, most wildfire-evacuation-
related studies use one-shot assignment rather than optimization-based formulation, with
exceptions for simplified networks, such as in (28) and (34). Model outputs typically include
aggregated metrics such as ETEs, fire exposure (e.g., (27)), or spatially or temporally
disaggregated link-level congestion status (e.g., (14,33)). In many evacuation studies across
hazards, agent-based models are widely adopted in the evacuation simulations (35–37). These
types of models are frequently leveraged to investigate the changes in evacuation performance
metrics in parametric studies by focusing on detailed evacuation choices, such as departure time,
route, and destination.

===== PAGE 8 =====

Zhao and Wong 7
1 TABLE 1 Key Models for Wildfire Evacuations
Traffic Simulation Models for Wildfire Evacuations
Reference Model Characteristics
Metrics Strategies or Scenarios
Demand Generation Departure Time Destination and Simulation Network + Demand
Routing Choices Type Data Source
(31)8/11/202 250 homes; vehicles per Household departure Dynamically updated Microscopic Clearance time, Adding new
1 8:14:00 household follows Poisson time follows Poisson least-cost routes to (Paramics) Digitized aerial mean vehicle travel infrastructure; varying
AM distribution (mean: 0.5-3 distribution (mean: 5- closest exits image and planning time, evacuation demand rate and
vehicles/household) 25 minutes) documents time of each departure delay
(Emigration Oak, household
UT) (disaggregated)
(29)* Not required; 30-150 Not required; Various static routing Microscopic Hypothesized (9 to Clearance time, Reducing intersection
vehicles per zone used for uniformly generated (minimize total travel (Paramics) and 25 intersections); total travel distance, merge/cross delays via
testing the clearance time within 15 minutes; distance, minimize manual digitized aerial image number of merges turn restrictions (lane-
on the hypothesized used for testing the merging or balanced); capacity of 20 intersections based routing); varying
network clearance time on the destinations solved analysis (Salt Lake City, UT) demand rate, signal
hypothesized network endogenously with timing and numbers of
routes exits
(34)* Three levels of evacuation Optimum departure System-optimal Mesoscopic Simplified extracted Network clearance Time-dependent staging
demand: 1,794, 3,558, and time solved dynamic traffic (DYNASMAR network (Fort Worth, time, total and policy for each origin;
5,692. Background traffic endogenously with assignment; destinations T-P) for TX) average trip time varying evacuation
and evacuees are in total routes solved endogenously network demand
47,300 with routes loading
(32) 1.5-5 vehicles per node, All departure finish by Fixed “shortest” path or Microscopic Digitized aerial Clearance time, Varying demand rate,
randomly assigned to 753 30 minutes (urgent), 1 dynamically updated (CORSIM) photograph (Summit fatalities, link level departure time (urgency),
nodes hour (medium), or 2 “fastest” path to pre- Park, Salt Lake City, max. queue length & incorporating rerouting
hours (slow) designated exits UT)
(27)* Grid network: 20-80 Set zonal departure Dynamically updated Microscopic Hypothesized (grid, Clearance time Staggering departure of
vehicles per block; Ring time interval: fastest route to any exit; (Paramics) ring); digitized aerial zones; varying demand
network: same vehicle hypothesized network: all exits are linked as image (San Marcos, rate
density as the grid 1 minute; one destination zone. TX)
network; real network of real network: 1 or 4
1-8 vehicles per household minutes
for 485 households

===== PAGE 9 =====

Zhao and Wong 8
(14) All households in 8 Not available (static) Shelters (15%), Friends Adjusted four- Planning documents Clearance time, Restricting the egress
evacuation districts with or families’ home step with static of main roads for link-level routes to evacuees;
background traffic; auto (60%), hotels (15%), out multiclass fire-prone congestion (volume- blocking the entrance to
ownership from US of county (10%) assignment neighborhoods to-capacity) evacuation zones;
Census (2000) (Colorado Spring, conducting
CO) contraflow
(38) Total population of about Evacuees react to Static routing to closest Microscopic Open Street Maps Clearance time, fire Conducting phased
9,000. 85% participate in visual triggers & exits (SUMO) with (OSM); census exposure count evacuation with dynamic
the evacuation, 1.5 people official warnings, both trigger model population; registered triggering, varying fire
per vehicle trip related to dynamic fire household addresses ignition locations and
front; decision and (Dandenong Ranges, weather conditions
preparation delay Australia)
(33) Uniformly distributed S-shaped cumulative Fixed “shortest” path or Microscopic Link-level speed, Closing roads; conducting
along residential/service departure periodically updated (SUMO) 1 OSM (Paradise, CA arrival curve, contraflow, varying
roads (23,635 vehicles for “fastest” path to any second time and Mill Valley, CA) average trip-time departure time
Paradise, 12,212 for Mill exit; all exits are linked step is used). concentration; varying
Valley) as one destination zone. demand rate, and
rerouting
* Emergency evacuations, not specific to wildfire evacuations
Other Key Literature Related to Simulations of Wildfire Evacuations
Reference Type of Model or Analysis Goal or Aim of Study
(39) Fire spread modeling (FlamMap), fire-spread network modeling, and Calculate evacuation trigger buffer a small community (Julian, California) and
shortest path analysis (altogether known as the Wildland-Urban Interface determine trigger zones
Evacuation model)
(40) Wildland-Urban Interface Evacuation model (WUIVAC) Apply data from the 2003 Cedar Fire in southern California to develop trigger buffers
and compare results to the event timeline to find possibly improvements
(41) Network and spatial data analysis (critical cluster model) Identify fire-prone communities with minimal egress opportunity in western U.S.
(3) Household-level model for trigger buffers and fire-spread modeling Determine evacuation trigger buffers (ETBs), recommended evacuation departure
(FlamMap) times (REDTs), and a ranking of households based on lead time
(42) Review of evacuation models Understand and review the scale, applicability, and interactions of fire, pedestrian, and
traffic models
(2) Review of traffic models for wildfire evacuations Understand and review the traffic models based on relation to fire spread, spatial and
demographic factors, temporal issues, and intended application and identification of 22
traffic models and applications
(43) Controlled behavior experiment and regression models Determine the collective evacuation decision of communities under different disaster
likelihoods and shelter availabilities
1

===== PAGE 10 =====

Zhao and Wong 9
2.4 Evacuation issues in other disasters
Evacuation strategies in wildfire emergencies can sometimes be different compared to other
disasters, due to characteristics of fire hazards. For example, time for advanced warnings in
wildfire evacuations (hours) are often shorter than those for hurricanes and flooding (often with at
least 24 hours in advance), but longer than tsunami evacuations (minutes in advance or no warnings
at all). The spatial extent of evacuations for each hazard are also different, where the distances of
evacuation trips include local sheltering (e.g., tsunamis), within-region evacuations (e.g.,
wildfires), and out-of-state evacuations (e.g., hurricanes). These spatial temporal differences along
with the difference in risks (63) alters evacuation behavior and the most efficient and effective
transportation response strategies. For example, compared with wildfire evacuations when cars are
the predominant mode of transport, tsunami evacuations are usually multi-modal, involving both
vehicular traffic and pedestrian traffic as people need to rapidly move to safety (35). Tsunami
evacuation destinations also tend to be closer in distance (to inland location or vertical shelters),
due to the minimal time to evacuate (36). Hurricane evacuations benefit from a longer period of
advanced warning (e.g., usually days in advance), but the spatial extents of the evacuation trips
are also the largest, sometimes requiring evacuations of over 100 miles to another state (44,45).
This can lead to large-scale transportation responses that span multiple states. While wildfires
often require more rapid evacuations compared to hurricanes, they also tend to impact a smaller
land area, threaten less people, and require shorter trips to reach a safe destination. Consequently,
wildfire evacuation transportation responses must be deployed faster than hurricane responses, but
they can also be more complex and time-intensive compared to tsunami evacuations.
Other types of disasters, such as nuclear power plant failures, chemical accidents, and hazardous
material accidents, also require evacuations. In nuclear power plant failures (e.g., the Three Miles
Island (TMI) nuclear accident, USA [1979] and the Fukushima nuclear disaster, Japan [2011]),
individuals evacuated lived in specific distances from the source of the accident. For example,
residents within several to tens of miles radius of the accident were ordered to evacuate in past
events (46,47). Since the direction of radioactive material plays a critical role, the strategies
employed could be parallel to those of wildfires. However, shelter-in-place strategies (e.g., staying
inside and reducing air flow into a building) are more common for these disasters than wildfires.
It should also be noted that the temporal length of evacuations from these types of disasters is
highly variable (46,48), which indicates that different evacuation strategies from a range of natural
hazards could be used. Altogether, the unique characteristics of hazards influences the most
effective transportation response strategies to improve evacuation outcomes. However, strategies
developed for one disaster could be effective for another disaster with similar spatiotemporal
characteristics. To test this possibility for wildfire evacuations, we considered a number of
strategies across hazards to begin developing a suite of evacuation strategies that are most effective
for wildfires.
3. METHODOLOGY
To address some gaps presented in the literature review and taking cues from (2), we developed a
survey-informed dynamic (spatial-queue) traffic simulation to evaluate evacuation performance
(time efficiency, evacuee safety) under different fire, human behavior, and transportation response
scenarios. The details of each component are introduced below in Figure 1 and following sections.

===== PAGE 11 =====

Zhao and Wong 10
Figure 1. Study framework
3.1 Spatial-Queue-Based Dynamic Traffic Simulation Model
We use a spatial-queue-based traffic model to simulate the evacuation process. We chose this over
popular microscopic simulators that implement car-following and lane-changing because the
spatial-queue-based model is less data intensive and is easier to program from scratch. The
simulator tracks individual vehicles through a vehicle routing module, a spatial-queue-based link
model, and an intersection model that prevents cross conflicts. The simulation runs at a time step
of 1 second, capturing detailed temporal traffic conditions, though not sub-link, sub-node or sub-
second behavior (e.g., interaction of multiple vehicles inside an intersection). At the beginning of
the simulation (or when rerouting is required), the routing module computes for the fastest path
using Dijkstra's Algorithm (49), based on the free flow speed (initial route) or average travel speed
in the past 20 seconds (subsequent rerouting). Vehicle routes are updated every 10 seconds for
those following real-time traffic updates similar to location-based direction services (e.g., Google
Maps, Apple Maps, Waze). Queues and spillbacks are simulated by the link model, which requires
a vehicle to spend at least the free flow travel time on a link, before joining a queue at the end.
When the end of the queue, formed by vehicles with some physical length, reaches the upstream
end of the link, no more vehicles can enter (spillback). Link flow capacity is assumed to be 1,900
vehicles/(hour×lane). Discretized into one-second time steps, link capacities are imposed in a flip-
coin probability manner, with the probability of a queuing vehicle leaving the current link or
entering the next link being 0.53 vehicles/(second×lane). At each 1-second time step, the node
model moves vehicles at the front of each link to the next link, as long as 1) it satisfies the inflow
capacity of the next link and the outflow capacity of the current link, and 2) it does not conflict
with other vehicles moving through the intersection at that time step (e.g., from perpendicular
direction, left-turns). Vehicles entering an intersection are assumed to have equal priority except
roundabouts (higher priority). All intersections are modeled as non-signalized (e.g., due to power
failures).

===== PAGE 12 =====

Zhao and Wong 11
3.2 Scenario Development
This research compares the effectiveness of different evacuation response/policy options via
scenario testing with controlled variables. In this section, the set of fixed inputs and variable
scenarios will be explained.
3.2.1 Road Network
The hypothesized evacuation occurs in the hilly northeast area of Berkeley. Most of the roads in
the study area are one-way-per-direction residential roads (Figure 2(b)). On-street parking is
common, creating many narrow choke points that prohibit two-way flow. However, off-street
parking is often recommended by the city on a red flag warning day (50). Figure 2(b) highlights a
few main evacuation routes. Among all possible routes leading away from the fire, Marin Avenue
is the straightest (no curve), but is also the steepest (maximum gradient over 30%). The other two
roads labeled in Figure 2(b) (i.e., Spruce Avenue and Euclid Avenue), are also frequently used by
residents. A distinct feature of the road network in the Berkeley Hills compared to other wildfire
evacuation study is that the road network here is “funnel-shaped.” Apart from the major egress
roads shown in Figure 2(b), there are many smaller roads that lead to safe areas. These roads can
serve as the evacuation route for a small number of vehicles that are routed off the main roads,
while also allowing for emergency access vehicles to go uphill if major roads are used for
contraflow operations. We also note that nearly all roads in the area are flanked by densely grown
trees and brush, which pose substantial fire risk and a high chance for toppled trees on roadways.
The road network for the study area was obtained from the OSM. The study area is defined to be
the city of Berkeley plus a 6.2-mile (10 km) buffer area, given wildfire evacuation trips are usually
short (1,14). To reflect slower driving on narrow, hilly roads, a discount factor of 0.8 was applied
on the speed limit. After processing the OSM data, a directed node-and-link-based road network
for the study area was obtained (Figure 2). The large and complex network consists of 15,294
nodes and 37,951 links.

===== PAGE 13 =====

Zhao and Wong 12
Figure 2. Map of the study area, road network, evacuation zones and fire hazard severity
zones. (a) The whole study area; (b) terrain map and numbers of lanes per road in the
evacuation zone; (c) four evacuation zones. (LRA: local responsible area; SRA: state
responsible area. VHFHSZ: very high fire hazard severity zone)
3.2.2 Fire Propagation
The Berkeley Hills area borders Tilden Regional Park and mostly falls within the California
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (Cal Fire) Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones
(VHFHSZ, Figure 2). A hypothesized fire is ignited at a transmission tower 0.9 miles northeast of
the Berkeley Hills area (coordinate: 37.910399, -122.249261). Fire spread can be modeled by
software such as FlamMap or the Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Dynamics Simulator (WFDS)
(39,51). However, WUI fire spread is difficult to model due to non-uniform buildings, defensible
space, and vegetation. Consequently, data from a nearby and real fire case (1991 Oakland Hills
Fire) was borrowed. Both sites are located on the east hillside of the East Bay Hills with similar
weather patterns, land topology, vegetation, and housing density. An elliptical fire growth model
was fitted to a georeferenced map of the Oakland Hills Fire (Figure 3) (52). The hypothesized fire
starts shortly before 11:00 am on a weekend, same as the Oakland Hills Fire. All households are
assumed to be at home. These two critical assumptions were used to constitute a “worse-case”
scenario. Evacuation orders are sent out 15 minutes after the onset of the fire (reasonable estimate
for an urban fire), starting the evacuation. Future work will be necessary to integrate wildfire
modeling with traffic simulations to produce more realistic evacuation models.

===== PAGE 14 =====

Zhao and Wong 13
Figure 3. (a) Chronological view of the development of the 1991 Oakland Hills Fire (via
Oakland Fire Department from georeferenced image by (52)). (b) Fitting elliptical curves
to the observed fire frontier.
3.2.3 Evacuation Zone
Based on fire location, evacuation orders are issued to an assumed area within Berkeley bounded
by several major streets (Hearst Avenue on the south, the Shattuck-Sutter-Arlington corridor on
the west and the city boundary on the east and north). To add land development realism, a parcel
map was obtained for the evacuation area, where each parcel is home to one to five households
depending on the land use code (53,54). This accounts for 7,438 households. For simplicity, areas
west of Shattuck Avenue (i.e., downtown Berkeley) and south of Hearst Avenue (i.e., University
of California, Berkeley campus) are assumed as temporary safe locations. For this study, we
generated a random list of origin-destination pairs, where 30%, 30%, 30%, and 10% of the vehicles
evacuate to destinations within 1-2 miles, 2-3 miles, 3-4 miles, and 5 or more miles. Our local
focus stems from our survey data that found upwards of two-thirds of evacuees remained within
their county of origin. The treatment of destination choices is simplistic, as evacuees’ destinations
could be influenced multiple factors (e.g., availability of shelters, proximity to resources, safety of
the destination). Moreover, we did not ask for exact destinations (by address or traffic analysis
zone) in our survey and these destinations will require more robust datasets such as mobile phone
traces. With this limitation in mind, the results of this study focus on the first half of the evacuation
trip (e.g., the time to reach 1 mile away from the evacuation zone or the distance/time exposed to
the fire). Time to the destination is not reported, as this does not provide any additional about risk
to the evacuee.
3.2.4. Transportation Response Scenarios
We tested a range of wildfire evacuation scenarios, which can be categorized into three groups:
hazard (fire speed), evacuation behavior (departure time, towed vehicle demand, transportation
mode choice, GPS-enabled rerouting), and policies/responses (phased evacuation, contraflow).
For a set of scenario variables, a base case value was chosen for comparison. Details of each
scenario are given in Table 2.

===== PAGE 15 =====

Zhao and Wong 14
Several post-disaster surveys of individuals impacted by California wildfires in 2017 and 2018
were used to define some scenario variables, as discussed in Table 2 (1). For example, mode choice
with a focus on vehicles per household was used as a key behavioral parameter. About 41% to
45% of evacuees depending on wildfire used two vehicles to evacuate. Moreover, an additional
9% to 17% of evacuees depending on wildfire used three or more vehicles to evacuate. Even small
increases of vehicles on the roadway could significantly increase congestion during a wildfire. For
route decision-making, only between 8% and 19% of evacuees depending on fire used GPS
navigation. This behavior is particularly interesting given that 78% to 87% of respondents overall
had access to in-vehicle or smartphone navigation. This result may be influenced by shorter
evacuations during wildfires (about two thirds evacuated within county) and/or evacuees’ greater
knowledge of route options. Finally, between 6% and 21% of evacuees depending on fire towed
items while evacuating (e.g., boats, trailers, or towing personal vehicles using recreational
vehicles). Towed items generally increase congestion, take additional space on narrow mountain
roads, and reduce traffic throughput. Individuals likely wanted to protect their processions from
the fire, leading them to tow items during the evacuation. Additional details and a thorough
discussion of these choices and more are provided in (1).
TABLE 2 Descriptions of Scenarios
Options
Category (Baseline Value Description
Underlined)
Hazard Scenario
• Wildfire speed depends on fuel type, wind
“Slow”: Basecase ROS × speed, humidity, land topology, etc.
0.5 • The baseline case uses the fire speed in the
1991 Oakland Hills Fire (Figure 3(b))
“Normal”: 1991 Oakland • Alternative cases assume the fire speed to be
Fire speed
Hills Fire rate of spread halved (e.g., with proper fuel management
(ROS) and/or firefighting, favorable weather) or
doubled (e.g., poor fuel management and/or
challenged firefighting, unfavorable
“Fast”: Basecase ROS × 2 weather)
Evacuee Behavior

===== PAGE 16 =====

Zhao and Wong 15
• Cal Fire emphasizes the importance
preparing and taking swift action in a
wildfire (“Ready, Set, Go!”)
• The planned departure times assumed as a
truncated normal distribution (i.e., truncated
“Fast”: 20 min ± 10 min
around the mean at ± one standard deviation)
• Vehicles will leave automatically if fire
Departure “Medium”: 40 min ± 20
reaches residents’ location regardless of the
time min
planned departure time
• The baseline case assumes the planned
“Slow”: 60 min ± 30 min
departure time to be the medium level
~N(40min, 20min), truncated at 20 min and
60 min.
• The alternative cases assume shorter or
longer departure times
• Normal vehicles assumed to take 26 ft. on
the road, invert of typical jam density (94)
• Towed vehicles assumed to take 50 ft. of
space (normal vehicle plus a 24 ft.
trailer/recreational vehicle)
0%
• Survey results indicated that between 6%
and 21% of households took towed vehicles
% household 10% (approximated
during their evacuation
towing item survey)
• It is assumed each household tows a
maximum of one item irrespective of the
25%
number of evacuating vehicles
• The baseline case assumes 10% households
tow an item
• The alternative case assumes 0% and 25%
households tow an item
• Survey results indicated that approximately
“Low”: 1 36-45%/41-45%/9-17% of households
vehicles/household (depending on wildfire case) evacuate with
1/2/3 vehicles and this is taken as the
# vehicles 44%/43%/13% households baseline (12,621 vehicles in total for our
per leave with 1/2/3 vehicles case)
household (approximated survey) • Alternative scenarios assume the number of
for vehicles per household to be one (7,438
evacuation “High”: 3 vehicles in total) or three (22,358 vehicles in
vehicles/household total)
• Other forms of transportation (i.e., bus, rail,
biking, walking) are converted to single
vehicle households for simplicity
% vehicles 0% • Survey results indicated that 91% to 93% of
rerouting the evacuees have smartphones but only

===== PAGE 17 =====

Zhao and Wong 16
with real 15% (approximated between 8% and 19% of people followed
time traffic survey) GPS directions during the evacuation
information (depending on wildfire case study)
50% • It is assumed updated routing information
will be available every 10 seconds based on
100% the average link traversal time in the past 20
seconds
15%, but lost connection to • Individuals that may reroute without perfect
real-time data in 6 minutes information are not considered
• The baseline scenario assumes 15% people
15%, but lost connection to follow dynamic updated fastest path while
real-time data in 30 the rest do not update their route
minutes
• Three alternative scenarios assume different
percentages of vehicles that dynamically
50%, but lost connection to
update their path
real-time data in 6 minutes
• Four alternative scenarios assume the
connectivity to the real-time routing
50%, but lost connection to
information is interrupted 10 or 30 minutes
real-time data in 30
after the start of the evacuation (e.g., cell
minutes
tower losing power)
Policy Scenario
• Evacuation area is divided into four zones
based on distance to the fire origin (Figure 2)
0 min • Zone boundaries are all secondary or tertiary
roads (i.e., important roads in the residential
Phased 15 min area)
evacuation • Baseline case assumes “no phased
time interval 30 min evacuation”: vehicles in four zones have the
same mean departure time
60 min • Alternative scenarios vary the time interval
in the mean departure time of vehicles in
each of the four evacuation zones
• Contraflow roads now switch all lanes in the
No contraflow evacuation direction
• Baseline case assumes “no contraflow”
Short-distance contraflow • Roads were identified based on long traffic
Contraflow on selected roads (Figure queues from the baseline simulation and
4) local knowledge of primary routes in the
area
Long-distance contraflow • Alternative scenarios assume a short-
distance or a long-distance contraflow
3.3. Limitations
In addition to the assumptions described in the prior section, we note several key limitations here.
First, the surveys exhibit self-selection bias as they were opt-in. We attempted to reduce this bias

===== PAGE 18 =====

Zhao and Wong 17
through a wide distribution across multiple agencies and news sources. Participants also skewed
wealthier with more vehicles, due to the online distribution, and the sample sizes for the surveys
were small. Additional survey limitations are described in further details in (1). The survey data
also has measurement error, leading us to choose approximate values for the model. Finally, we
note that we used survey data from other locations to develop the scenarios for the Berkeley Hills,
as a major fire has not occurred recently in the Berkeley Hills. Despite this possible mismatch of
traffic, social, climate, and cultural factors, the surveys and our study area were similar based on
fire risk (WUI zones), housing type (mostly single-family residences) and income level (high
income level). Future work is needed to apply modeling across more geographies and collect more
survey data to increase generalizability.
There are limitations regarding the network representations. For example, even though the city
recommends off-street parking on a red flag day, the compliance is not guaranteed. This is a major
issue hindering evacuation, as the road network in the study area (as well as many other high-risk
sites beyond this study) is quite windy and narrow. Also, there are critical intersections where left-
turns block other movements or where two traffic streams merge. Evacuation efficiency could be
significantly improved if these critical intersections can be correctly managed (e.g., forming
undisrupted evacuation routes (55)). However, such strategies usually require optimization
techniques to be formulated and are not included in this study. We also note that our network does
not consider the impacts of vehicle breakdowns or emergency vehicles (which need to travel uphill
towards the fire). However, since contraflow is not instituted on all uphill routes, emergency
vehicles would find alternative roads to access the fire or those in needs. The network analysis also
assumes that most evacuees will not travel far distances, which is supported by the survey data.
However, mass evacuations over 100,000 people may require a better understanding of
destinations and shelter types (along with the suitability of these locations) for the simulation.
Regarding traffic models, due to data availability and coding efficiency considerations, sub-link
behaviors in the model (e.g., lane-changing aggressive drivers) were not included. The node model
is not detailed enough to investigate within-intersection events. We remove signaling for
simplicity, since so few nodes in the study area are signalized. The “fastest” path assumption is
limited as evacuees likely do not have full knowledge of congestion, choosing detours to
circumvent congestion. Research has also shown that other factors impact routing beyond shortest
path (11,56). Pedestrian-vehicle interactions are not considered, evacuees are assumed to leave via
a vehicle (overestimating congestion), and individuals rerouting without perfect information are
not considered.
For the scenarios, interactions of different strategies are not considered due to the already large
numbers of studied variables, despite possible correlated effects (57). Incidents such as fallen trees
blocking the roads are not considered. A shelter-in-place option is not considered. We assume
100% of residents are home and 100% of evacuees will leave even though research has shown
compliance of mandatory evacuation orders around 90% (11). This oversimplification is chosen
to model both a disadvantageous scenario for congestion, but also an ideal outcome (in terms of
compliance to mandatory evacuation orders) for public safety agencies. We also note that we
oversimplify the evacuation process (one trip per household, with no trip-chaining). Past research
has demonstrated that evacuees may take multiple stops before reaching the destination. For
example, (6) found that people make 1.1 intermediate stops on average based on post-wildfire

===== PAGE 19 =====

Zhao and Wong 18
surveys in Haifa, Israel. Families with children make more intermediate stops, at 1.5 on average.
(58) also argued that trip-chaining helped explain certain travel behaviors (e.g., evacuating towards
the fire area), which avoids overly optimistic travel time predictions. In the simulation case study
presented in this paper, trip chains are not considered (e.g., child pickup or helping carless
individuals). However, the considered scenario, namely a weekend morning when all residents are
at home, is likely to imply an equally disadvantageous demand level. First, additional trips such
as child pickup or return home from work are usually happening during work hours, which
coincides with the time that most residents are away from home in the residential neighborhood.
Second, during wildfire events, there are usually orders in place that prevents people from entering
the fire zone.
Apart from excluding trip-chaining, we also simplify the model by not including surrounding
vehicles (i.e., background traffic), multiple pre-evacuation trips by households, or post-evacuation
trips. We also did not consider shadow evacuations (i.e., evacuation of individuals who did not
receive a mandatory evacuation order), which is a limitation. More data is needed to determine the
extent of shadow evacuations, especially in cases where evacuation orders are delivered effectively
and on-time. We also note that specific vulnerable population evacuations were not considered.
For instance, in zip code area 94708, which covers most of the evacuation area, there are 2,850
Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) beneficiaries (59). Agencies with local
knowledge should make these populations a priority. The destination choice in the simulation is
based on the notion that most wildfire evacuations are short-distance trips. Destinations for each
simulated vehicle are randomly sampled according to the trip distance distribution obtained from
the survey. Three random variables are used, and results indicate that stochasticity in destination
locations only have minor impacts on the results. Future work is necessary to also consider how
shelter locations could be incorporated into the modeling.
Most critically, simulations are not perfect representatives of real-life behavior. The number of
factors, random events, and governmental decisions would be nearly impossible to model. We
acknowledge that our simulation, while incorporating past behavioral data, could be continuously
improved with greater realism. This might also include how demographic characteristics impact
the decision to evacuate or stay/defend (see (6–8,11,13)). Though, most of these studies have found
that risk perceptions, not demographics, are better predictors of choice. Regardless, integrating
discrete choice analyses with this simulation framework is a logical next step. Finally, the
simulation framework is not straightforward for agencies to use directly due to the lack of an
interactive dashboard. Efforts are being made to make the code and data open-sourced, as
discussed in Section 3.4. Our aim is to produce a workable simulation model that is a stepping
stone for more behaviorally driven research.
3.4 Simulation Reproducibility
Reproducibility is defined as the ability to confirm the results of a previous experiment by means
of another similar experiment (60), and it is a crucial criterion in ensuring the credibility of
scientific results. (60) categorized reproducibility into four levels, from being able to reproduce
the results using the same data and model, to reproducing the results based on general descriptions
of the model specifications. The model presented in this paper is based on computer simulations.
Efforts to ensure reproducibility include:

===== PAGE 20 =====

Zhao and Wong 19
1. Stating model specifications and key assumptions in detail in the methodology section
(Section 3). Based on these specifications, the results can be verified and reproduced in
other simulation software;
2. Conducting repeated experiments with random seeds as shown in the results section
(Section 4). Despite the minor differences in each random experiment, the magnitude and
overall conclusions of the results were largely unchanged;
3. Providing open-sourced simulation code. To ensure that the results and conclusions are
reproducible by future researchers, the simulation code is open-sourced, and data inputs
are available upon request.
4. RESULTS
We begin with presenting the baseline case for the wildfire simulation. Figure 4 shows the
simulated congestion status at two specific time steps for the baseline case. Each road link is
colored by vehicle density, while each road node is represented by pre-departed vehicles. Figure
4(a) shows results at 45 minutes since giving out the evacuation order. The traffic is visibly heavier
than Figure 4(b), which is at 1 hour and 45 minutes after giving out the evacuation order. We note
that the most congested roads are often branch roads merging into key routes (e.g., the roads
leading to Marin Avenue).
For each scenario shown in Table 2, the alternatives are compared against the base scenario, while
fixing all other strategies to their respective baseline values (underlined values in Table 2). Three
random repetitions are conducted to reduce the influence of random variabilities on the outcomes.
Two evacuation related metrics are shown in detail:
● Safe Vehicles: Total number of vehicles that have reached at least one mile away from the
evacuation zone;
○ Designates vehicles reaching safe location;
○ Can derive evacuation time estimates;
● Exposed Vehicles: Number of vehicles within in the fire frontier;
○ Identifies vehicles overtaken by the fire (i.e., potential risk or danger);
○ Does not necessarily signify fatalities.
The metrics are plotted over time for the baseline and each comparison scenario. Other summary
statistics are given in Table 3, including time of exposed vehicles and average distance from the
fire frontier.

===== PAGE 21 =====

Zhao and Wong 20
Figure 4. Results from the spatial-queue-based traffic simulation, including the vehicle
density on each road link and number of pre-depart vehicles (either because of the delay in
departure or being blocked from the first link). (a) Results at 45 minutes since the evacuation
order is given out (1 hour since the ignition of the fire); (b) Results at 1 hour and 45 minutes
since the evacuation order is given out (2 hours since the ignition of the fire);
4.1 Fire Speed
We first vary the fire speed to reflect potential changes in weather conditions, firefighting, and/or
fuel management. In the baseline case, fire overtook the first vehicle at 14 minutes after the
evacuation order was given (Figure 5(a)). The number of exposed vehicles reached its peak of 782
vehicles at 2.3 hours. Compared to the baseline, this metric decreases by 56% if the fire speed can
be reduced to half (e.g., through effective firefighting, fuel management, weather, etc.) or increases
by 55% if the fire speed doubles. Figure 5(b) shows safe vehicles and the associated ETEs. Fire
speed only minimally influences ETEs since most vehicles depart before the fire reaches their
households in all scenarios. Additional work will need to identify how departure time and
mobilization time is influenced by fire speed, especially given the role of speed in challenging
evacuations in past wildfires (1).

===== PAGE 22 =====

Zhao and Wong 21
Figure 5. The impact of fire speed on (a) exposed vehicles; (b) number of safe vehicles.
4.2. Departure Timing
The three departure time scenarios (“fast”, “medium” and “slow”, Table 2) represent departure
times after receiving the evacuation order. Scenarios perform similarly for exposed vehicles
(Figure 6(a)), possibly due to relatively close means for all three cases (20, 40 and 60 minutes).
The number of exposed vehicles in the “fast” departure scenario grows ahead of the other two
cases due to earlier buildup of queues on Marin Avenue (a key local route).
Figure 6(b) shows both the cumulative number of vehicles that started the evacuation (dashed line)
and safe vehicles. We note that the dashed line for the cumulative distribution function (CDF) does
not follow a truncated normal function, since some vehicles cannot enter fully saturated links. The
“fast” case is the most efficient in ETEs, showing the benefit in early departure. However, the
magnitude of the time savings of a 20-minute earlier departure is minimal. Compared with Section
4.4 (phased evacuation), more gradual departure times (without staggering the departure spatially)
alleviate less congestion.
Figure 6. The impact of departure delays on (a) exposed vehicles; (b) safe vehicles.
4.3 Towing
Normal vehicles are assumed to take 26 ft of space on road, the invert of typical jam density (94)
with towed items taking an additional 24 ft (approximate trailer length). Assuming the percentage
of households towing items is 0% or 25%, the simulation results in -5% and 8% changes in the
total vehicle length compared to the baseline

===== PAGE 23 =====

Zhao and Wong 22
(10% households take towing items). The maximum number of exposed vehicles changed by -3%
and 5% compared to the baseline, while the ETEs changed by -7 minutes and +4.2 minutes, a
rather small change compared to other scenarios.
Figure 7. The impact of towing items on (a) exposed vehicles; (b) safe vehicles.
4.4 Transportation Mode Split
Evacuating households often use multiple vehicles to take belongings, family members, and pets
or to remove the vehicle from danger (61), leading to more congestion. Our baseline case sets the
household vehicles for evacuation according to the survey (about 1.7 per household), resulting in
782 exposed vehicles (about 6% of the total demand) and an ETE of about 3 hours. If all
households evacuate with only one vehicle, the maximum number of exposed vehicles falls to 245
(about 3% of the total demand) and the ETE is cut to 1.9 hours. If all households evacuate with
three vehicles, exposed vehicles reach 2,497 (11% of the total demand). Only 19,953 vehicles can
reach the safe area in 4 hours (89% of the total demand in this scenario).
Figure 8. The impact of number of vehicles per household on (a) exposed vehicles; (b) safe
vehicles. Note the scales are different.
4.5 Real-Time Traffic Information for Rerouting
Rerouting can theoretically relieve congestion by distributing the traffic to other roads. The black
lines in Figure 9(a) presents baseline results with 15% rerouting (similar to the survey). The
orange, blue and green curves correspond to scenarios where 0% (no information), 50% (strong
access to rerouting information), and 100% (theoretically equivalent to automated vehicles [AVs])
of the drivers reroute. Compared to baseline, the exposed vehicles change by +20%, -51% and -

===== PAGE 24 =====

Zhao and Wong 23
89%, respectively. Figure 9(b) shows that the alternative scenarios can also reduce the ETEs to
3.2, 2.1 and 1.2 hours compared to 2.9 hours in the baseline case.
Figure 9. The impact of vehicle rerouting on (a) exposed vehicles; (b) safe vehicles.
However, rerouting may not be a safe option due to road closures or connectivity challenges, as
was the case of the Camp Fire (62). We further explored this scenario in the simulation and the
results are shown Figure 10. In Figure 10, results of two levels of real-time routing participation
rate (15% and 50%) and three levels of interruption timing (no interruption, interrupt at 30 minutes
and 6 minutes) are plotted. In the base case (black curves), 15% of vehicles follow real-time routing
information, and such information is available throughout the evacuation process. Comparatively,
the orange and red curves show the results when the connection to the real-time information is
interrupted at 30 minutes or 6 minutes. Unless the connectivity is lost at a very early stage, the
influence on evacuation efficiency is minimal (orange curve almost coincides with the base curve).
The reasoning is that the total number of rerouting vehicles (15%) is relatively small. For these
vehicles, many are routed away from the congested roads at the beginning and are not adjusted
significantly during the evacuation. This can be seen in Figure 11(a), where the thickness of the
lines indicates the numbers of vehicles using each link throughout the entire simulation and the
color indicates the percentages of rerouting vehicles. We note that the percentage of rerouting
vehicles on the congested roads (thick lines) is lower (less than 5%) than the scenario average of
15% rerouting. As a result, interrupting rerouting after congestion starts to form will not alleviate
or worsen congestion significantly. However, if rerouting is interrupted at the beginning of the
simulation (e.g., the red curve in Figure 10), the vehicles with rerouting capabilities are not able
to avoid the congestion, since delays have not started to form when they are planning their routes.
The results of a loss of connectivity early in the evacuation are very similar to results without
rerouting (orange curve in Figure 9). For higher usage of real-time rerouting (50% of vehicles
using real-time rerouting, blue/green/purple curves in Figure 10), the impact of losing such
information is clearer. As shown in Table 3, if the connection to the real-time information is lost
at 30 minutes while 50% of the evacuees are trying to follow it for routing, the number of exposed
vehicles increases by almost 100 compared to the no interruption case, while the total exposed
time (vehicle-hours) increases by over 50%. Figure 11(b) also illustrates this. Since evacuation
efficiency is dominated by the congestion on a few routes, significant improvements could be
made if vehicles on these congested routes could have used real-time rerouting to seek an
alternative route.

===== PAGE 25 =====

Zhao and Wong 24
Figure 10. The impact of interrupting real-time routing at different stages of the
evacuation.
Figure 11. Total numbers of vehicles using each link (thickness) and percentages of vehicles
with real-time rerouting on each link (color scale). (a) 15% of all evacuees follow real-time
traffic information; (b) 50% of all evacuees follow real-time traffic information.
4.6 Phased Evacuation
Phased evacuations often improve congestion by reducing the maximum instantaneous traffic load
and increases overall safety by prioritizing residents in greater danger (63). We tested phasing by
altering time intervals between the mean departure time of different evacuation zones (Figure 12).
Figure 12(a) shows exposed vehicles for different phased evacuation intervals. By giving a 15-
minute priority to each of the evacuation zones closer to the fire (blue curve), exposed vehicles
reduce by 78%. If the phase interval increases to 30 minutes (green curve), exposed vehicles reduce
by 94%. However, if the phase interval becomes too large (e.g., 60 minutes, orange curve), some
vehicles may leave too late and be overcome by the fire, increasing exposed vehicles slightly
compared to the 30-minute case. Figure 12(b) shows safe vehicles differ minimal from baseline
for phase intervals of 15 minutes and 30 minutes. However, when the phase interval becomes 60
minutes, the network is underutilized (characterized by flat lines).

===== PAGE 26 =====

Zhao and Wong 25
Figure 12. The impact of phased evacuation on (a) exposed vehicles; (b) safe vehicles.
4.7 Contraflow
In this study, the locations of contraflow were identified based on inspecting the bottlenecks in
Figure 4, centerline markings, and local knowledge of downhill routes as:
For short-distance contraflow, resources are assumed to be limited and the strategy could only be
implemented along the key egress routes to slightly beyond the evacuation boundary:
● West side downhill routes (3.7 miles long, extending 0.5 mile outside of the evacuation
zone): Marin Avenue → Spruce Street → Oxford Street; and
● East side downhill routes (1.9 miles long): Shasta Road → Glendale Avenue → La Loma
Avenue → Cedar Street → Euclid Avenue → Le Conte Avenue → Hearst Avenue (→
join the westside contraflow routes at Oxford Street).
When there are sufficient personnel and time, contraflow roads can be extended to local
highways. In this scenario, the contraflow strategies are also implemented following roads:
● Shattuck Avenue and Martin Luther King Junior Way, from University Avenue till CA-
24 (2.7 miles).
● University Avenue, from Shattuck Avenue till I-80 (2.2 miles).
Figure 13(a) shows a reduction of 53% of exposed vehicles after implementing contraflow to the
evacuation zone boundary. In the extended contraflow scenario, the number of exposed vehicles
reduced by 73% compared to the baseline. In Figure 13(b), the number of safe vehicles and ETE
does not change substantially when the evacuation lanes terminate close to the evacuation
boundary. In fact, this is in accordance with the characteristics of contraflow: it helps absorb more
vehicles from branch roads to the contraflow lanes, thus making it faster for the vehicles to outrun
the fire. However, in an urban setting, the downstream (sink) capacity is still limited by the end of
the contraflow roads, leading to vehicle queues downstream of the contraflow roads. By extending
the contraflow lanes to a further distance away from the evacuation zone, it is possible to reduce
the queue spillback into the evacuation zone, making it faster for vehicles to leave the dangerous
area.

===== PAGE 27 =====

Zhao and Wong 26
Figure 13. The impact of contraflow on (a) exposed vehicles; (b) safe vehicles.
4.8 Summary of Findings
Four summary statistics are given in Table 3 for comparison: 1) exposed vehicles; 2) ETE; 3)
amount of time exposed vehicles were in the fire frontier; and 4) average distance from fire. The
time for all vehicles to complete the evacuation is not shown, as the evacuation destinations were
picked at random and sometimes constitute long trip times.
Based on summary statistics in Table 3, phased evacuations with 30-minute departure time
interval, >50% vehicle rerouting, personal vehicle reduction (1 vehicle per household) and
instituting contraflow beyond the evacuation zone boundaries are the most effective strategies.
These strategies can greatly reduce the load of the traffic temporally (phased evacuations),
spatially (rerouting and contraflow), and overall (personal vehicle reduction). Each strategy has
limitations: phased evacuations require strict adherence to mandatory orders, vehicle rerouting
requires real-time information from power and cell sources and quick detection of road closures,
personal vehicle reduction requires significant education and a willingness to give up an expensive
asset, and contraflow requires planning efforts and is labor-intensive during its execution.
Some strategies (e.g., slowing fire speed, phased evacuation with less time intervals between
zones, selective contraflow) have less impact on ETEs but still lead to moderate reductions in
exposed vehicles. Reducing fire speed provides more time for slower households to leave. We
found that rapid phasing, compared to more drawn-out phasing, overloads the network too quickly
and is not as effective as other phasing intervals. Contraflow over a short length also removes
individuals quickly from the fire area, but downstream congestion still leads to high ETEs. Several
strategies, such as changing towing behavior and speeding up departure times, lead to minimal
reductions in both exposed vehicles and ETEs. The worst case among all scenarios studied is to
evacuate with three vehicles per household. This represents the highest evacuation demand on a
network with limited capacity and is detrimental in all metrics evaluated.
The above simulation results are based on the series of scenarios and assumptions as stated in
Sections 3.2 and 3.3. In reality, situations that deviate from these assumptions might happen and
lead to changes in the outcomes. For example, depending on the time and day of the incident, there
may be less people at home compared to the current assumption. This will reduce the evacuation

===== PAGE 28 =====

Zhao and Wong 27
demand, effectively leading to less challenging evacuation situations similar to the effect of vehicle
reduction. Also, it has been suggested that people may make multiple trips during the evacuation
(6,58). This has the potential to increase the overall ETE and conflicts at intersections, for example.
Other factors that will affect evacuation outcomes include shadow evacuations, the presence of
pedestrians sharing the road network, vehicle breakdowns, emergency vehicles traveling in the
opposite direction, transportation of vulnerable populations, and public transit usage. In addition,
the resilience and operations of the infrastructure may also impact the overall evacuation
efficiency. For instance, signals that are not optimized may create long queues of traffic backing
up (64). However, as the signalized intersections in the study area are mostly out of the evacuation
zone, it may not significantly affect evacuation metrics, such as the fire exposure time.
Realistically, multiple disadvantageous scenarios may happen at the same time, such as a fast-
moving fire that damages the communication and navigation infrastructure, causing difficulties in
coordinating contraflow operations between emergency personnel and/or evacuee challenges in
accessing real-time routing information.
TABLE 3. Summary of Evacuation Efficiency Metrics under Different Strategy Scenarios.
Evacuation Efficiency Metrics
Total
Evacuation Time Time of Distance
Exposed Vehicles
Estimate (ETE) Exposed from Fire
Vehicles
Time (hrs),
Min.
Max # veh all
Total veh- average
in fire % change vehicles % change
hours fire distance to
frontier at from reach from
frontier the fire
the same baseline safety, 1 baseline
(veh-hrs) frontier
time (veh); ml from
(miles)
evac zone;
Baseline
Baseline 782 - 2.9 - 954 0.6
Fire speed
×0.5
342 -56% 2.8 -1% 350 0.8
(slower)
×2 (faster) 1,209 +55% 2.8 -2% 1,569 0.5
Departure time
Less delay 729 -7% 2.7 -5% 910 0.4
More 747 -4% 3.1 +7% 906 0.6
delay
% towed vehicles
0% 757 -3% 2.8 -4% 885 0.7
25% 821 +5% 3.1 +2% 906 0.6

===== PAGE 29 =====

Zhao and Wong 28
# vehicles per household for evacuation
1 245 -69% 1.8 -36% 129 0.9
3 2,497 +219% >4 >+40% 5,057 0.4
% vehicles rerouting with real-time traffic information
0% 943 +20% 3.2 +11% 1,320 0.6
50% 381 -51% 2.1 -28% 279 0.8
100% 86 -89% 1.2 -58% 35 0.7
15%, stop
979 +25% 3.1 +7% 1,430 0.6
at 6 min
15% stop
771 -1% 2.8 -3% 974 0.6
at 30 min
50%, stop
979 +25% 3.1 +7% 1,430 0.6
at 6 min
50%, stop
474 -39% 2.1 -28% 411 0.8
at 30 min
Phased evacuation time difference between bands
15 min 173 -78% 2.9 +2% 188 0.8
30 min 49 -94% 3.2 +10% 35 0.8
60 min 80 -90% >4 >+40% 40 0.7
Contraflow
Short
367 -53% 2.6 -10% 310 0.8
contraflow
Long
209 -73% 1.7 -41% 84 0.9
contraflow
5. POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
The modeling results point to clear opportunities for emergency management and transportation
agencies to reduce wildfire evacuee risk and improve ETEs. In Table 4, we present each of the
transportation responses, their priority, and possible recommendations for agencies to pursue. We
note that many strategies will require careful planning and substantive communication with
residents. Indeed, informational and educational campaigns (not infrastructure or operational
changes) that attempt to nudge behavior may be the most cost-effective strategy to improve
evacuation outcomes.

===== PAGE 30 =====

Zhao and Wong 29
TABLE 4: Policy Recommendations for Transportation and Hazard Responses and
Strategies
Transportation/ Hazard Response Priority
1. Slowing Fire Speed Moderately Recommended
Description
Slowing fire speed will reduce the number of vehicles in the fire frontier and allow for longer
mobilization times, especially for vulnerable populations who might need more time to
evacuate. However, slowing fire speed requires very quick and rapid response to the hazard or
longer-term fuel management strategies (e.g., fuel breaks), which may not be feasible for some
jurisdictions. Moreover, the typology, land development, and weather conditions may make
fire suppression nearly impossible, placing firefighters or aircrafts at risk.
Recommendations for Emergency Management and Transportation Agencies
• Manage fuels and create fire breaks by reducing highly flammable vegetation in high-
risk areas (e.g., near powerlines) and along roadways
• Develop rapid detection systems for wildfires (e.g., cameras, sensors, physical
lookouts, crowdsourced information, drones)
• Work with homeowners and landowners through education, funding, and enforcement
to create defensible space, fire resistant structures, and backup water storage systems
Feasibility
Fire spread depends on the weather, topology, and fuel. Studies have shown that fuel
management such as Fuel Reduction Burning (FRB) can effectively slow down the rate of
head fire spread (65). Also, structures that are separated by sufficient distances or have
defensible space around them can help stop or slow down fire (66). Smart technologies are
also maturing and have been adopted in practice, such as using fire cameras combined with
Artificial Intelligence (AI) to rapidly detect fire and smoke at early stage (67). The benefits of
slowing fire spread are clear, but actions will require substantial effort by agencies and
residents. Agencies should work on community preparedness and prescribed burning.
Residents should conduct actions for the residence (e.g., clean gutters, use fire resistant roofing
and exterior in high-risk areas). Economically, however, this can be difficult for low-income
communities (e.g., metal roofing can be 5-10 times more expensive than asphalt roofing
materials), indicating equity challenges.
2. Reducing Departure Delays Moderately Recommended
Description
Reducing the departure time lag between receiving a mandatory evacuation order and
evacuating can help remove at-risk people more quickly. However, this strategy alone is not
enough to sufficiently reduce evacuation risk. Moreover, some individuals, such as individuals
with a physical disability, may need extra assistance and additional time to evacuate.
Recommendations for Emergency Management and Transportation Agencies

===== PAGE 31 =====

Zhao and Wong 30
• Issue mandatory evacuation orders as quickly as possible to ensure enough time for
individuals to mobilize and leave, especially individuals with access and functional
needs (AFN)
• Encourage residents to create go-bags that speed up the mobilization process
• Include in mandatory evacuation orders an approximate amount of time they should
spend mobilizing that is long enough to prepare but also short enough to evacuate
individuals quickly
Feasibility
Reduction in departure delay can be achieved through improving pre-event preparedness and
giving evacuation orders in a timely and clear manner. Cal Fire and local agencies have made
efforts in improving this preparedness with the public-facing website readyforwildfire.org that
disseminates “Ready, Set and Go” information (68). For alert systems, most local areas are
gradually adopting state-of-the-art software, such as Code Red, and/or updating their Wireless
Emergency Alert (WEA) system. However, issues remain in disseminating information
quickly, in multiple languages, with adequate direction, and to enough people (1). Reducing
evacuation delay is attainable, but based on recent experience, a robust communication system
(along with correct decision-making from officials) is needed.
3. Reducing the Amount of Towing Minimally Recommended
Description
Additional mobile assets (e.g., trailers, boats, motorhomes) create more demand, but this
increase is minimal to moderate. A reduction in towing leads to some gains across evacuation
metrics. However, mobile assets tend to be expensive, making them a higher priority for
protection.
Recommendations for Emergency Management and Transportation Agencies
• Encourage residents in high-risk areas with mobile assets to gain wildfire (e.g.,
disaster) insurance
• Suggest to residents to hook up and prepare mobile assets ahead of potential fire
danger to reduce mobilization time
• Develop plans for parking areas outside of potential evacuation zones for residents to
take mobile assets during high fire danger weather (i.e., pre-disaster trip-making)
Feasibility
There is currently little information on agency regulation or recommendations regarding
towing vehicles, so its current feasibility is hard to assess. Based on the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) highway statistics of 2019, the ratio of trailers versus automobiles (all
privately owned) in the fire-prone states California, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington were
0.16, 0.18, 0.22 and 0.20, respectively (69). The values are within range of the simulation
inputs (0-25%) in this study. Trailer usage in places with large farm animals may be higher
and planning for their safe evacuation might be more crucial.
4. Reducing Number of Evacuating Vehicles Highly Recommended

===== PAGE 32 =====

Zhao and Wong 31
Description
The travel demand from multiple vehicle households greatly increases exposed vehicles and
ETEs. By reducing the number of vehicles taken by households, congestion will be greatly
diminished and allow evacuees to reach their destinations more quickly. Reducing vehicles is
highly recommended for all jurisdictions but this strategy will require significant and proactive
educational campaigns.
Recommendations for Emergency Management and Transportation Agencies
• Recommend to residents to take as few vehicles as possible (i.e., enough to transport
people and key belongings) through an educational and informational campaign
• Suggest to resident to pre-pack vehicle(s) in advance such that space is used efficiently
in vehicles
• Encourage evacuees taking more than one vehicle to provide their extra space to
carless individuals and other vulnerable populations to improve equitable outcomes
• Develop an equitable insurance framework for protecting vehicles of residents in high-
risk fire areas
• Develop plans for parking areas outside of potential evacuation zones for residents to
take additional vehicle during high fire danger weather (i.e., pre-disaster trip-making)
Feasibility
Based on data from 1990-2010, the WUI is the fastest growing land use type in the contiguous
United States (70). With mostly single-family houses in the WUI (71), private vehicle are the
primary mode of transport in such areas. In the Berkeley Hills area (most of which belongs to
zip code 94708), the average household size is 2.3, but there are nearly 2 vehicles per
household on average. As a result, carpooling would be considered less attractive given the
high car-ownership. Israel, for example, having lower car ownership than the United States,
was reported to use 0.89 vehicles per household for evacuation (6). The benefits of vehicle
reduction during evacuations are well understood in the literature, and there is already some
development of education campaign by agencies. For example, Marin County in California
advocates on its website that “every seat should be filled” and that evacuees should “assist
elderly or disabled neighbors” and “carpool with neighbors to reduce traffic” (72,73). (57)
noted the difficulty in vehicle reduction and compared this to the “prisoner’s dilemma”, where
residents would have to forsake personal properties (vehicles and belongings that could not be
taken) for the overall benefit of reduction in traffic. One important possibility is that auto
insurance could help to reduce the financial loss of vehicles if they are left at the residence.
Some auto insurance policies cover wildfire damage but not all people can afford this
comprehensive coverage. In terms of parking capacity in the study area, there are nearly 1,400
off-street parking spots owned and operated by the City of Berkeley, including three garages
and two surface parking lots in Downtown Berkeley, South Berkeley, and the Elmwood
district (74). There are also over 1,400 parking spaces at the North Berkeley and Ashby
stations for Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) (75). In addition, the above totals do not count for
parking owned by companies, employers, or private operators. Other parking structures, such
as those on the nearby University of California, Berkeley campus, can also provide additional
space for the pre-evacuation of vehicles. For other cities, a similar crude validation can be used
t o estimate the feasibility of a pre-evacuation parking strategy.

===== PAGE 33 =====

Zhao and Wong 32
5. Increasing GPS-Based Rerouting Highly Recommended
Description
Higher rates of rerouting led to significant reductions in exposed vehicles and ETEs. Even
smaller percentages of rerouting (15%) were far more effective than other potential
transportation strategies. Despite these benefits, a rerouting strategy will have to ensure that
GPS-guided directions are available, accurate, and followed by evacuees.
Recommendations for Emergency Management and Transportation Agencies
• Partner with GPS mapping services (e.g., Google Maps, Apple Maps, Waze) and auto
manufacturers with GPS guidance to ensure that systems with be operational in a
disaster
• Update mapping services through official or crowdsourced information of blocked
routes (i.e., downed powerlines, trees) and current fire location
• Work with and require utilities to have backup generators for key communication
services (e.g., high-speed mobile Internet) to ensure GPS directions are available
• Produce pre-disaster information related to GPS guidance to evacuees and encourage
usage of services, even for short evacuations
• Encourage services to default applications to reroute in an evacuation, rather than
remain on the current route
• Consider future integration of wildfire evacuation information to automated vehicles
(AVs)
• In the long-term, develop vehicle-to-everything (V2X) technologies that can exchange
information and compute real-time routes without relying on vulnerable
communication infrastructures (e.g., cell towers)
Feasibility
Real-time rerouting is an effective strategy in all scenarios studied in the simulation. However,
its feasibility is dampened by several challenges. First, real-time rerouting services are mostly
provided by private companies. While many have shown strong willingness to assist (e.g.,
Google hazard map showing real-time closures), companies have yet to develop robust
partnerships with agencies. Second, GPS systems need to be paired with transmission
infrastructure (e.g., cell towers) to communicate with the central server about current
positions. However, cell towers and other communication infrastructures have been
susceptible to power outages, losses of backhaul fibers, and structure damages from wildfires
(76). In 2020, California Public Utilities Commission issued a new decision for major wireless
providers to have 72 hours of backup power and build new communication resiliency and
emergency operations plans (77). Other opportunities for ensuring communication include the
use of short-range equipment to act as temporary stations (e.g., using drones to relay wireless
signals in (78)). However, these innovations are still largely conceptual. Finally, people may
not choose real-time routing guidance during an evacuation, opting instead for routes that are
shorter, have less fire danger, and high-quality pavement conditions (12). Altogether, real-time
routing requires improvements to enhance V2G (vehicle to grid) infrastructure and V2V
(vehicle to vehicle) infrastructure to support more secure and robust communication to make
rerouting feasible (79–82).

===== PAGE 34 =====

Zhao and Wong 33
6. Phasing Evacuations Highly Recommended
Description
Depending on the phasing time difference (and size of phased zones), a phased evacuation
strategy can be effective in improving evacuation outcomes on its own. However, phasing
requires significant pre-planning activity and active communication with residents before and
during the evacuation, making it difficult to implement. Moreover, the characteristics of the
wildfire may make a phased evacuation impossible, as the fire may overcome non-evacuated
zones.
Recommendations for Emergency Management and Transportation Agencies
• Research, develop, and widely distribute phased evacuation plans that create
reasonable time bands (e.g., approximately 30 minutes for a highly urban fire)
• Use known boundaries and easy to identify landmarks and roads to set evacuation
zones for phasing
• Maintain a relatively small number of potential zones to reduce confusion in the
evacuation process and reduce the number of messages sent to evacuees
• Convey emergency evacuation orders and warnings by zones
• Prepare for contingencies (i.e., changes in time bands) if the fire spread is faster or
slower than expected
Feasibility
Dividing the fire-prone area into zones is an effective way to move as few people as needed to
safe areas (83). In practice, agencies can construct evacuation zones based on both natural (e.g.,
vegetation type) and human factors (e.g., landmarks, clearly defined roads) (84,85). The initial
research can be done as a desktop study, as the vegetation coverage map, the road network map,
and other geospatial information can be readily obtained from sources such as the LANDFIRE
program and OpenStreetMap. During the development stage, refinement can be made through
meetings with the emergency responders and the wider community (14). Prior to wildfires,
residents need to be informed of their zones, potentially through letters sent to homeowners and
renters or announcements via online neighborhood hubs such as Nextdoor. Interactive zone
maps for the jurisdiction can also be created easily using tools such as ArcGIS online (e.g.,
Berkeley Evacuation Zone Map from (86)). During the wildfire, geo-coded alerts can be sent to
residents in targeted zones. For example, alerts can be sent to the residents in specific areas
through FEMA’s Integrated Public Alert & Warning System (IPAWS) system through multiple
pathways using commercial software (87,88). However, reliability of the software could be
problematic, as previous technical difficulties have been reported (89). Lastly, zone-based
phased evacuation may not work as planned if the fire spreads too quickly. In such case, public
agencies may need to use a variety of communication tools (e.g., radios, phone calls, social
media platforms, person-to-person interactions) to keep evacuees informed (62).
7. Instituting Contraflow Moderately Recommended

===== PAGE 35 =====

Zhao and Wong 34
Description
Contraflow strategies can reduce the exposed vehicles from the fire frontier. Extending the
contraflow operation beyond the immediate boundary of the evacuation zone can help to
further improve the ETEs. However, contraflow tends to be an expensive procedure that
requires significant pre-planning, time to executive, and personnel. For resource-strapped or
smaller agencies, contraflow may not be a viable option.
Recommendations for Emergency Management and Transportation Agencies
• Develop contraflow plans that focus on highly congested roads, arterials, and
neighborhoods with few exits to maximize effectiveness and minimize resource needs
• Notify evacuees ahead of time of the plan to switch lanes to flow in the opposite
direction
• Consider potential turning or merging conflicts when designing contraflow routes
• Pre-plan traffic operations (e.g., changing signals to prioritize traffic away from the
fire) and consider congestion-reducing mechanisms near the end of the contraflow to
minimize bottlenecks and upstream queuing in the fire frontier
Feasibility
The practicality and benefits of contraflow has been demonstrated mainly in hurricane
evacuations. However, its success is heavily dependent on proper planning and execution.
Early studies pointed out several factors that might prevent contraflow from achieving its
optimum outcome. On the planning level, limitations include the cost of planning and
infrastructure changes, safety implications, confusion caused by evacuees’ unfamiliarity to the
arrangement, and reduced access for service and emergency vehicles (90). On the operational
level, especially on urban roads/arterials, challenges remain in identifying contraflow links
analytically, disseminating contraflow information timely, and maintaining traffic flow
through reversed lanes and intersections (91). However, it has been shown that simple and
inexpensive actions, such as providing enough entrance capacity and carrying out merges after
the evacuation area, can greatly improve contraflow efficiency (92,93).
6. CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we developed a spatial-queue-based dynamic traffic simulation model that
incorporated behavioral data from post-disaster wildfires in California. This simulation model was
applied to a wildfire evacuation case in the Berkeley Hills Area of Berkeley, California. To
incorporate realism, we considered a range of variables including fire speed, departure time,
destination choice, mode choice, number of towed vehicles, queuing, rerouting, and two policy
strategies (e.g., contraflow, phased evacuation). We aimed to produce a data-driven model that
could identify possible transportation response strategies for agencies with minimal time, funds,
resources, or knowledge to respond to a wildfire evacuation. Compared to other evacuation
models, the incorporation of behavioral data, focus on policies and strategies, and realistic details
(e.g., dynamic routing, parcel level data, complicated street network) signify an important step for
the field.

===== PAGE 36 =====

Zhao and Wong 35
We found strong indications that phased evacuations, vehicle rerouting, and reduction in personal
vehicles were the most effective strategies for reducing the number of exposed vehicles in the fire
frontier and/or the evacuation time estimate (ETE). Implementing these strategies, while
challenging, would not be unrealistic for small and/or poorly resourced emergency management
and transportation agencies. The strategies would require substantial pre-disaster communication
and accurate, timely messaging during the wildfire. Contraflow for an extended length beyond the
evacuation boundary was also found to be effective in reducing ETEs and exposed vehicles.
However, this strategy would be potentially hard to implement for resource-strapped agencies if
guidance is required at every intersection. A vehicle rerouting strategy may also require new
partnerships with GPS-based mapping platforms (e.g., Google Maps, Apple Maps, Waze). In
addition, the phased evacuation results showed that too small or too large of time intervals would
be less efficient, suggesting a need for thoughtful planning. We also found moderate improvements
in evacuation outcomes for implementing contraflow (for short lengths under resource constraints)
and slowing fire speed for our case study. In combination with other strategies, these responses
may prove to be highly useful under different conditions (e.g., for a different road network).
Given the level of details that the simulation can support (e.g., road network, vehicle behavior),
there are many assumptions involved that have been documented extensively in Section 3 and offer
broader application. Specifically, the intended application of this simulation is for preparedness
analysis and reconnaissance of real events, where reasonable assumptions can be made based on
local knowledge or post-event surveys. For example, for many resource-strapped communities in
the WUI area, it is imperative to understand the most cost-effective precautionary measures and
implement corresponding policies. This best-working strategy is likely to be different for each
community, thus a flexible simulation model framework such as the one presented in this paper
becomes valuable. The model can be adapted to incorporate local knowledge-based assumptions
to find the critical policy scenario specific to the local context. For post-event reconnaissance, (64)
presented the application of a similar framework in Paradise, CA to simulate the Camp Fire
evacuation. In that study, the assumptions were made according to the field interviews with local
officials. Consequently, the modeling approach in this paper demonstrates the applicability of the
simulation framework to analyze alternative scenarios and gain valuable lessons from
reconstructing past events.
However, more research is needed on this topic based on the limitations of the paper. For example,
the model could use additional realism through better post-disaster data (including verification
with mobile phone data) and integration with a fire spread model. The model also requires
application across more jurisdictions in California, in North America, and globally for
generalizability assessments. Most critically, work is needed to link this model to a transit-based
evacuation model that better incorporates the needs of vulnerable populations and includes data
on how vulnerable populations make decisions in wildfire evacuations. With increasing frequency
and size of wildfire evacuations, realistic and practice-oriented models that incorporate behavioral
realism will become even more critical to ensure that all people are safe.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was made possible via an SB 1 grant from the University of California Institute of
Transportation Studies, the Graduate Research Fellowship Program (National Science
Foundation), and the Dwight D. Eisenhower Transportation Fellowship Program (Federal

===== PAGE 37 =====

Zhao and Wong 36
Highway Administration). We thank the many agencies and community organizations across
California for distributing the surveys and Professor Kenichi Soga, Professor Susan Shaheen, and
Professor Joan Walker from the University of California, Berkeley for their support. We express
our gratitude to the anonymous reviewers for their time and valuable advice on improving the
quality of this paper.
8. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: study conception and design: B. Zhao,
S. Wong; data collection: S. Wong; modeling: B. Zhao; analysis and interpretation of results; draft
manuscript preparation, results review, and final approval: all authors.
9. REFERENCES
1. Wong SD, Broader JC, Shaheen SA. Review of California Wildfire Evacuations from 2017
to 2019 [Internet]. University of California Institute of Transportation Studies; 2020 Mar.
Available from: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5w85z07g
2. Intini P, Ronchi E, Gwynne S, Pel A. Traffic modeling for wildland-urban interface fire
evacuation. Journal of Transportation Engineering Part A: Systems. 2019;145(3):1–15.
3. Li D, Cova TJ, Dennison PE. A household-level approach to staging wildfire evacuation
warnings using trigger modeling. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems. 2015 Nov
1;54:56–67.
4. McLennan J, Ryan B, Bearman C, Toh K. Should We Leave Now? Behavioral Factors in
Evacuation Under Wildfire Threat. Fire Technol [Internet]. 2018 Jul 17 [cited 2018 Oct 3];
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10694-018-0753-8
5. Mozumder P, Raheem N, Talberth J, Berrens RP. Investigating intended evacuation from
wildfires in the wildland-urban interface: Application of a bivariate probit model. Forest
Policy and Economics. 2008 Aug;10(6):415–23.
6. Toledo T, Marom I, Grimberg E, Bekhor S. Analysis of evacuation behavior in a wildfire
event. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction. 2018 Oct;31:1366–73.
7. Lovreglio R, Kuligowski E, Gwynne S, Strahan K. A modelling framework for householder
decision-making for wildfire emergencies. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction.
2019 Dec 1;41:101274.
8. McCaffrey S, Wilson R, Konar A. Should I Stay or Should I Go Now? Or Should I Wait
and See? Influences on Wildfire Evacuation Decisions. Risk Analysis. 2018 Jul
1;38(7):1390–404.
9. Paveglio TB, Boyd AD, Carroll MS. Wildfire evacuation and its alternatives in a post-
Black Saturday landscape: Catchy slogans and cautionary tales. Environmental Hazards.
2012 Mar 1;11(1):52–70.

===== PAGE 38 =====

Zhao and Wong 37
10. Strahan K. Factors influencing householder self-evacuation in two Australian bushfires.
2017 [cited 2018 Oct 3]; Available from: http://researchbank.rmit.edu.au/view/rmit:162093
11. Wong SD, Broader JC, Walker JL, Shaheen SA. Understanding California Wildfire
Evacuee Behavior and Joint Choice-Making. 2020 May 1 [cited 2020 Jun 4]; Available
from: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4fm7d34j
12. Wong SD, Chorus CG, Shaheen SA, Walker JL. A Revealed Preference Methodology to
Evaluate Regret Minimization with Challenging Choice Sets: A Wildfire Evacuation Case
Study. Travel Behaviour and Society. 2020 Jul 1;20:331–47.
13. Kuligowski E. Evacuation decision-making and behavior in wildfires: Past research, current
challenges and a future research agenda. Fire Safety Journal. 2020 May 3;103129.
14. de Araujo MP, Lupa MR, Casper CT, Waters B. Wildfire Evacuation Scenario in Colorado.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board. 2014
Jan;2430(1):133–44.
15. Wong S, Shaheen S. Current State of the Sharing Economy and Evacuations: Lessons from
California. 2019 Jun 1 [cited 2019 Jun 27]; Available from:
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/16s8d37x
16. Wong SD, Broader JC, Shaheen SA. Can Sharing Economy Platforms Increase Social
Equity for Vulnerable Populations in Disaster Response and Relief? A Case Study of the
2017 and 2018 California Wildfires. Transportation Research Interdisciplinary
Perspectives. 2020 May 1;5:100131.
17. Wong SD, Walker JL, Shaheen SA. Role of Trust and Compassion in Willingness to Share
Mobility and Sheltering Resources in Evacuations: A Case Study of the 2017 and 2018
California Wildfires. 2020 Feb 1 [cited 2020 Feb 28]; Available from:
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1zm0q2qc
18. Murray-Tuite PM, Mahmassani HS. Transportation Network Evacuation Planning with
Household Activity Interactions. Transportation Research Record. 2004 Jan;1894(1):150–9.
19. Noh H, Chiu Y-C, Zheng H, Hickman M, Mirchandani P. Approach to Modeling Demand
and Supply for a Short-Notice Evacuation. Transportation Research Record. 2009
Jan;2091(1):91–9.
20. Vorst HCM. Evacuation models and disaster psychology. Procedia Engineering.
2010;3:15–21.
21. Lim GJ, Zangeneh S, Reza Baharnemati M, Assavapokee T. A capacitated network flow
optimization approach for short notice evacuation planning. European Journal of
Operational Research. 2012 Nov;223(1):234–45.

===== PAGE 39 =====

Zhao and Wong 38
22. Golshani N, Shabanpour R, Mohammadian A (Kouros), Auld J, Ley H. Analysis of
evacuation destination and departure time choices for no-notice emergency events.
Transportmetrica A: Transport Science. 2019 Nov 29;15(2):896–914.
23. Shahparvari S. Possibilistic scheduling routing for short-notice bushfire emergency
evacuation under uncertainties_ An Australian case study. 2016;22.
24. Cohn PJ, Carroll MS. Evacuation Behavior during Wildfires: Results of Three Case
Studies. 2006;10.
25. Murray-Tuite PM, Mahmassani HS. Model of Household Trip-Chain Sequencing in
Emergency Evacuation. Transportation Research Record. 2003 Jan;1831(1):21–9.
26. So SK, Daganzo CF. Managing evacuation routes. Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological. 2009;44(4):514–20.
27. Chen X, Zhan FB. Agent-based modelling and simulation of urban evacuation: relative
effectiveness of simultaneous and staged evacuation strategies. Journal of the Operational
Research Society. 2008 Jan 1;59(1):25–33.
28. Cova TJ, Johnson JP. A network flow model for lane-based evacuation routing.
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice. 2003 Aug;37(7):579–604.
29. Cova TJ, Johnson JP. A network flow model for lane-based evacuation routing.
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice. 2003 Aug;37(7):579–604.
30. Cova TJ, Johnson JP. Microsimulation of Neighborhood Evacuations in the Urban–
Wildland Interface. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space. 2002
Dec;34(12):2211–29.
31. Cova TJ, Johnson JP. Microsimulation of Neighborhood Evacuations in the Urban–
Wildland Interface. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space. 2002
Dec;34(12):2211–29.
32. Wolshon B, Marchive III E. Emergency Planning in the Urban-Wildland Interface:
Subdivision-Level Analysis of Wildfire Evacuations. Journal of Urban Planning and
Development. 2007 Mar 1;133(1):73–81.
33. Chen Y, Yusef Shafi S, Chen Y. Simulation Pipeline for Traffic Evacuation in Urban Areas
and Emergency Traffic Management Policy Improvements. 2020 Feb; Available from:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06198
34. Sbayti H, Mahmassani HS. Optimal Scheduling of Evacuation Operations. Transportation
Research Record. 2006 Jan 1;1964(1):238–46.
35. Wang H, Mostafizi A, Cramer LA, Cox D, Park H. An agent-based model of a multimodal
near-field tsunami evacuation: Decision-making and life safety. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies. 2016 Mar;64:86–100.

===== PAGE 40 =====

Zhao and Wong 39
36. Mas E, Suppasri A, Imamura F, Koshimura S. Agent-based Simulation of the 2011 Great
East Japan Earthquake/Tsunami Evacuation: An Integrated Model of Tsunami Inundation
and Evacuation. Journal of Natural Disaster Science. 2012;34(1):41–57.
37. Parikh N, Hayatnagarkar HG, Beckman RJ, Marathe MV, Swarup S. A comparison of
multiple behavior models in a simulation of the aftermath of an improvised nuclear
detonation. Auton Agent Multi-Agent Syst. 2016 Nov;30(6):1148–74.
38. Beloglazov A, Almashor M, Abebe E, Richter J, Steer KCB. Simulation of wildfire
evacuation with dynamic factors and model composition. Simulation Modelling Practice
and Theory. 2016 Jan 1;60:144–59.
39. Dennison PE, Cova TJ, Mortiz MA. WUIVAC: a wildland-urban interface evacuation
trigger model applied in strategic wildfire scenarios. Natural Hazards. 2007;41:181–99.
40. Larsen JC, Dennison PE, Cova TJ, Jones C. Evaluating dynamic wildfire evacuation trigger
buffers using the 2003 Cedar Fire. Applied Geography. 2011 Jan 1;31(1):12–9.
41. Cova TJ, Theobald DM, Norman JB, Siebeneck LK. Mapping wildfire evacuation
vulnerability in the western US: the limits of infrastructure. GeoJournal. 2013 Apr
1;78(2):273–85.
42. Ronchi E, Rein G, Gwynne SMV, Intini P, Wadhwani R. Framework for an integrated
simulation system for Wildland-Urban Interface fire evacuation. In 2017 [cited 2020 Jul
23]. p. 119–34. Available from: http://lup.lub.lu.se/record/1840add0-243c-40b1-a60c-
e7f7e2be3b51
43. Nguyen C, Schlesinger KJ, Han F, Gür I, Carlson JM. Modeling Individual and Group
Evacuation Decisions During Wildfires. Fire Technol [Internet]. 2018 Sep 21 [cited 2018
Oct 3]; Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10694-018-0770-7
44. Chen X, Meaker JW, Zhan FB. Agent-Based Modeling and Analysis of Hurricane
Evacuation Procedures for the Florida Keys. Nat Hazards. 2006 Jul;38(3):321–38.
45. Stephen Wong SS. Understanding Evacuee Behavior: A Case Study of Hurricane Irma.
2018 [cited 2021 Mar 31]; Available from: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9370z127
46. Cutter S, Barnes K. Evacuation behavior and Three Mile Island. Disasters. 1982;6(2):116–
24.
47. Akabayashi A, Hayashi Y. Mandatory evacuation of residents during the Fukushima
nuclear disaster: an ethical analysis. Journal of Public Health. 2012 Aug;34(3):348–51.
48. Do XB. Fukushima Nuclear Disaster displacement: How far people moved and
determinants of evacuation destinations. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction.
2019 Feb;33:235–52.

===== PAGE 41 =====

Zhao and Wong 40
49. Kumar K. Dijkstra Priority Queue [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Jul 19]. Available from:
https://github.com/cb-cities/sp
50. City of Berkeley. Red Flag Warning for the Berkeley Hills [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2021 Mar
31]. Available from:
https://www.cityofberkeley.info/City_Manager/Press_Releases/2020/2020-10-
20_Red_Flag_warning_for_the_Berkeley_hills.aspx
51. United States Forest Service. Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Dynamics Simulator (WFDS)
[Internet]. 2013 [cited 2020 Jul 19]. Available from:
https://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/fera/wfds/simulation_models.shtml
52. Ryan D. Map of Oakland Hills Fire [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2020 Jul 19]. Available from:
http://djjr-courses.wikidot.com/soc128:project13-fires
53. Alameda County Assessor’s Office. The Assessor’s Use Codes [Internet]. 2005 [cited 2020
Jul 19]. Available from: https://www.acgov.org/MS/prop/useCodeList.aspx
54. Alameda County Data Sharing Initiative. Parcels [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Jul 19].
Available from: https://data.acgov.org/
55. Xie C, Turnquist MA. Lane-based evacuation network optimization: An integrated
Lagrangian relaxation and tabu search approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies. 2011 Feb;19(1):40–63.
56. Brachman ML, Church R, Adams B, Bassett D. Wayfinding during a wildfire evacuation.
Disaster Prevention and Management: An International Journal. 2019 Jan 1;29(3):249–65.
57. Chen YY, Yusef Shafi S, Chen YY, Shafi SY, Chen YY. Simulation Pipeline for Traffic
Evacuation in Urban Areas and Emergency Traffic Management Policy Improvements
[Internet]. Feb, 2020. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06198
58. Pel AJ, Bliemer MCJ, Hoogendoorn SP. A review on travel behaviour modelling in
dynamic traffic simulation models for evacuations. Transportation. 2012 Jan;39(1):97–123.
59. Social Security Administration. OASDI Beneficiaries by State and ZIP Code [Internet].
2019 [cited 2021 Mar 31]. Available from:
https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/oasdi_zip/2019/ca.html
60. Dalle O. On reproducibility and traceability of simulations. In: Proceedings of the 2012
Winter Simulation Conference (WSC). 2012. p. 1–12.
61. Lindell M, Murray-Tuite P, Wolshon B, Baker EJ. Large-scale evacuation. New York:
Routledge; 2019.
62. Comfort L, Soga K, Stacey M, McElwee M, Ecosse C, Dressler G, et al. Collective Action
in Communities Exposed to Recurring Hazards [Internet]. Natural Hazards Center; 2019
[cited 2020 Jul 25]. Report No.: QR300. Available from:

===== PAGE 42 =====

Zhao and Wong 41
https://hazards.colorado.edu/quick-response-report/collective-action-in-communities-
exposed-to-recurring-hazards
63. So SK, Daganzo CF. Managing evacuation routes. Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological. 2010 May;44(4):514–20.
64. Soga K, Comfort L, Zhao B, Lorusso P, Soysal S. Integrating Traffic Network Analysis and
Communication Network Analysis at a Regional Scale to Support More Efficient
Evacuation in Response to a Wildfire Event [Internet]. Berkeley, USA: University of
California Institute of Transportation Studies; 2021 Mar [cited 2021 Mar 31]. Available
from: https://berkeley.app.box.com/s/4y0uozbbtz5zwcct34fh4bvuga46a9t4
65. McCarthy GJ, Tolhurst KG, Victoria, Fire Management. Effectiveness of broadscale fuel
reduction burning in assisting with wildfire control in parks and forests in Victoria. East
Melbourne: Dept. of Natural Resources and Environment; 2001.
66. Hakes RSP, Caton SE, Gorham DJ, Gollner MJ. A Review of Pathways for Building Fire
Spread in the Wildland Urban Interface Part II: Response of Components and Systems and
Mitigation Strategies in the United States. Fire Technol. 2017 Mar;53(2):475–515.
67. Alchera Inc. Alchera [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Mar 31]. Available from:
https://alcherainc.com/en/
68. Cal Fire. Wildfire is coming... Are you ready? [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2020 Mar 31].
Available from: https://www.readyforwildfire.org/prepare-for-wildfire/ready-set-go/
69. FHWA. Highway Statistics 2019. Trailer and semi-trailer registrations. [Internet]. 2020
[cited 2020 Nov 28]. Available from:
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/2019/
70. Radeloff VC, Helmers DP, Kramer HA, Mockrin MH, Alexandre PM, Bar-Massada A, et
al. Rapid growth of the US wildland-urban interface raises wildfire risk. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2018 Mar 27;115(13):3314–9.
71. Thomas DS, Butry DT. Areas of the U.S. wildland–urban interface threatened by wildfire
during the 2001–2010 decade. Nat Hazards. 2014 Apr;71(3):1561–85.
72. Firesafe Marin. Wildfire Evacuation Checklist. Marin County [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2021
Nov 28]. Available from:
https://www.firesafemarin.org/images/documents/resources/evac/FIRESafe_MARIN_Evac
uation_Checklist.pdf
73. Firesafe Marin. Wildfire Evacuation Preparedness [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Nov 28].
Available from: https://www.firesafemarin.org/evacuation
74. City of Berkeley. Off Street Parking (Garages & Lots [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2021 Mar 31].
Available from:

===== PAGE 43 =====

Zhao and Wong 42
https://www.cityofberkeley.info/Public_Works/Transportation/Off_Street_Parking_(Garage
s_and_Lots).aspx
75. BART. 2015 BART Station Profile Study [Internet]. Bay Area Rapid Transit; 2015.
(Station Profiles - Home Origins). Available from:
https://www.bart.gov/sites/default/files/docs/StationProfile2015_HomeOriginOnePagers_re
v0629.pdf
76. Anderson S, Barford C, Barford P. Five Alarms: Assessing the Vulnerability of US Cellular
Communication Infrastructure to Wildfires. In: Proceedings of the ACM Internet
Measurement Conference. 2020.
77. California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). CPUC Requires Wireless Companies to
Better Serve Customers in Emergencies [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2021 Mar 31]. Available
from:
https://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PublishedDocs/Published/G000/M343/K979/343979403.PDF
78. Xie Y, Liu X-Y, Kong L, Wu F, Chen G, Vasilakos AV. Drone-Based Wireless Relay
Using Online Tensor Update. 2016;8.
79. Abuelela M, Olariu S. Taking VANET to the clouds. 2010;8.
80. Flötteröd Y-P, Erdmann J. Dynamic Reroute Modeling for Emergency Evacuation: Case
Study of Brunswick City, Germany. 2018;11.
81. Elbery A, Hassanein HS, Zorba N, Rakha HA. VANET-Based Smart Navigation for
Emergency Evacuation and Special Events. In: 2019 IEEE 24th International Workshop on
Computer Aided Modeling and Design of Communication Links and Networks (CAMAD)
[Internet]. Limassol, Cyprus: IEEE; 2019 [cited 2020 Nov 24]. p. 1–6. Available from:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8858502/
82. Han R, Tolan M, McCloskey R, Cleary F. A NOVEL EMERGENCY EVACUATION
ALGORITHM FOR VEHICLES BASED ON VEHICLE-TO-VEHICLE (V2V)
COMMUNICATION. 2019;10.
83. FEMA. Planning Considerations: Evacuation and Shelter-in-Place Guidance for State,
Local, Tribal, and Territorial Partner [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2021 Mar 31]. Available from:
https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-07/planning-considerations-evacuation-and-
shelter-in-place.pdf
84. Wilmot CG, Meduri N. Methodology to Establish Hurricane Evacuation Zones.
Transportation Research Record. 1922;9.
85. Wong S, Martin I, Halpern J. KENSINGTON EVACUATION RESEARCH PROJECT
FINAL REPORT. 2020;124.
86. City of Berkeley. Wildfire Evacuation [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2021 Mar 31]. Available
from: https://www.cityofberkeley.info/WildfireEvacuation/

===== PAGE 44 =====

Zhao and Wong 43
87. FEMA. Integrated Public Alert & Warning System. Federal Emergency Management
Agency [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2021 Mar 31]. Available from:
https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/practitioners/integrated-public-alert-warning-
system
88. OnSolve. CodeRED for IPAWS [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2021 Mar 31]. Available from:
https://www.onsolve.com/landing/codered-for-ipaws/
89. Todd Z, Trattner S, McMullen J. Ahead of Camp Fire Anniversary, New Details Emerge of
Troubled Evacuation. PBS - Frontline [Internet]. 2019 Oct 25; Available from:
https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/camp-fire-anniversary-new-details-troubled-
evacuation/
90. Wolshon B. “One-Way-Out”: Contraflow Freeway Operation for Hurricane Evacuation.
Nat Hazards Rev. 2001 Aug;2(3):105–12.
91. Tuydes H, Ziliaskopoulos A. Tabu-Based Heuristic Approach for Optimization of Network
Evacuation Contraflow. Transportation Research Record. 2006;12.
92. Theodoulou G, Wolshon B. Alternative Methods to Increase the Effectiveness of Freeway
Contraflow Evacuation. Transportation Research Record. 2004 Jan;1865(1):48–56.
93. Lim E, Wolshon B. Modeling and Performance Assessment of Contraflow Evacuation
Termination Points. Transportation Research Record. 2005;11. \
94. May, A.D. (1990), Traffic Flow Fundamentals, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
