===== PAGE 1 =====

A F S T D H
IRST TEP OWARDS YNAMIC YBRID
T M
RAFFIC ODELING
Najia Bouha(cid:63)(cid:63) , Gildas Morvan(cid:63), Hassane Aboua¨ıssa(cid:63), Yoann Kubera(cid:63)
(cid:63) Univ. Lille Nord France, 59000 Lille, France,
U-Artois, LGI2A (EA 3926),
Technoparc Futura, 62400 Be´thune, France
Email: (hassane.abouaissa, gildas.morvan, yoann.kubera)@univ-artois.fr
(cid:63)(cid:63) Universite´ Ibn Zohr, Faculte´ des Sciences,
Agadir, Morocco,
Email: najia.bouha@gmail.com
KEYWORDS and forecasting, the repercussion of the construction of new
parts on infrastructure onto the global behavior of the traffic
Agent-based modeling; Multi-level modeling; Intelligent
flow, ... According to the defined objective, several models
transportation systems; Simulation; Traffic flow
have been developed and can be classified into microscopic,
ABSTRACT mesoscopic and macroscopic models. However, to simulate
Hybridtrafficmodelingandsimulationprovideanimportant large-scale road networks, it can be interesting to integrate
way to represent and evaluate large-scale traffic networks at different representations in the same framework which leads
differentlevels ofdetails. Thefirstlevel, called“microscopic” to the so-called “hybrid modeling” as shown on fig. 1. Note
allows the description of individual vehicles and their inter- that the concept of hybrid modeling has different meanings
actions as well as the study of driver’s individual behavior. accordingtothestudieddomain.Here,hybridmodelingmeans
The second, based on the analogy with fluidic dynamic, is the the coupling of different models.
“macroscopic” one and provides an efficient way to represent In this paper, the first step is devoted to the integration of
trafficflowbehaviorinlargetrafficinfrastructures,usingthree microscopicandmacroscopicmodelsintoasingleframework.
aggregated variables: traffic density, mean speed and traffic Theconceptofhybridmodelinghasbeendevelopedbyseveral
volume. An intermediate level called “mesoscopic” considers authors. Hence, some existing hybrid micro-macro traffic
a group of vehicles sharing common properties such as a models are shown in Table I.
same origin and destination. The work conducted in this
paper presents a first step allowing simulation of wide area simulated entities control strategies
traffic network on the basis of dynamic hybrid modeling,
where the representation associated to a network section can
macro flow of vehicles ramp metering
change at runtime. The proposed approach is implemented in
a simulation platform, called JAM-FREE.
meso group of vehicles variable-message panels
INTRODUCTION
Severe congestion is a daily problem which leads to a con-
micro vehicle vehicle instrumentation
tinuouslygrowthofdirectandindirectcost.Trafficcongestion
which can be recurrent typical to rush hours or non recurrent Fig.1. Hybridtrafficsimulationandcontrolapproach
due to accidents, works, ... represents a major preoccupation
of many transportation institutions and practitioners, calls for
anefficientandintelligentdynamicmanagement.Accordingly, The models presented in Table I share the same limitation:
severalworkswereundertakentostudythetrafficphenomena, connections between levels are fixed a priori and cannot be
to implement effective strategies for an optimal use of the changed at runtime. Therefore, to be able to observe some
existing infrastructure and to minimize the congestion effects emerging phenomena such as congestion formation or to find
as well as a high quality of service. Nevertheless, the im- theexactlocationofajaminalargemacrosection,adynamic
plementation of traffic measurement and control algorithms hybrid modeling approach is needed.
calls for a deep understanding of the traffic phenomena. The work presented in this paper is devoted to overcome
In this context, traffic flow modeling and simulation play these shortcomings and proposes the first step towards the
an important role and constitute efficient tools to perform development and implementation of dynamic hybrid models.
tasks such as traffic prediction and monitoring, traffic control Such a new approach provides an efficient way to change the
5102
yaM
72
]AM.sc[
1v75270.5051:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====

model micromodel macromodel
Use cases examples
Magneetal.(2000) SITRA-B+ SIMRES
Poschingeretal.(2002) IDM Payne Inordertoassesstherelevanceofourapproachfordynamic
BourrelandLesort(2003) LWR
optimalvelocity hybrid simulation, use cases demonstrating the limits of the
MammarandHaj-Salem(2006) ARZ
Espie´ etal.(2006) ARCHISM SSMT existing solutions depicted in Table I are presented in this
Elhmam(2006) genericABM LWR,ARZ,Payne section.
Joueiaietal.(2013) IDM LWR
ReducetheCPUloadduringpeakhours: Thehybridmodel
TABLEI
can change the traffic representation of a portion of the road
STATICMICRO-MACROTRAFFICFLOWMODELSPROPOSEDINTHE
LITERATURE network dynamically. This feature can be used to switch from
a microscopic representation to a macroscopic one, when the
CPU is overused in order to reduce its load. Such situations
includecaseswherethenumberofsimulatedvehiclesbecomes
levelofrepresentationdynamically.Asaresultofthesedevel- too high to be managed satisfyingly by the CPU (for instance
opment, a platform called JAM-FREE has been implemented. during peak hours). This case is illustrated in figure 2.
Inthefollowingsections,weidentifythemainissuesrelated BalancetheCPUloadbetweenclusters: Thehybridmodel
to dynamic hybrid traffic modeling and then propose some can change the traffic representation of a portion of the road
generic solutions to them. Then, the JAM-FREE simulator is networkdynamically.Thisfeaturecanbeusedtoswitchfrom:
presented, as well as some simulation results. Finally, we • a microscopic representation to a macroscopic one when
conclude and suggest some research perspectives. the CPU is overused in order to reduce its load,
• inversely (from macroscopic to microscopic), in order to
DYNAMICHYBRIDTRAFFICMODELING:MOTIVATIONSAND
detect the reason for the occurrence of traffic congestion.
EXISTINGSOLUTIONS
These features can be used jointly to balance the CPU load
Motivations
between two clusters.
Traffic simulation is generally used to:
Such situations include cases where a traffic jam (or con-
1) simulatetheroadtrafficflowonverylargeandcomplex gestion) appears in a cluster using a macroscopic model and
infrastructures including both city and highways while where the number of simulated vehicles in another cluster
2) being able to test the effects of different traffic signs, is significantly reduced (for instance during off-peak hours).
for example, or traffic assignment and dynamic routing Such situations also include cases where a traffic jam appears
strategies. It provides also a simple way to evaluate in a cluster using a microscopic model and where the number
the impact of dynamic traffic control (ramp-metering, ofsimulatedvehiclesinanotherclusterissignificantlyreduced
dynamic speed limit, ...) on the whole behavior of the (for instance during fluidic period of the flow) as illustrated
traffic, in figure 3.
3) assess their precise influence on the traffic flow and Findoutthereasonoftheoccurenceofthe trafficjam: Fig-
4) understand how and why traffic perturbations leading to
ure4showsanexampleoftheoccurenceoftrafficcongestions.
appearance of congestions do occur.
It demonstrates the relevance of dynamic hybrid simulations
The first goal is easily achieved using macroscopic simula- toswitchbetweentwolevelsofrepresentationinordertofind
tion models at the expense of the fourth goal. Conversely, the out the causes of the appearance of these phenomena.
fourth goal is easily carried-out using microscopic simulation Followmovingmacroscopicphenomena: Thestaticdivision
models at the expense of the first goal. To deal with this of the road network into clusters that can be found in most
paradox, and benefit from both approaches, a dynamic hybrid of the existing approaches causes precision losses. Indeed, a
model can be used. traffic flow simulator has to be able to reproduce macroscopic
The advantages of this hybrid approach include the ability: phenomena such as shockwaves, capacity drop, ...Yet, the
• To obtain both quantitative and qualitative information static decomposition found in static hybrid models will cause
abouttheroadtraffic,usingrespectivelymacroscopicand eventually a loss of quantitative information. To avoid this
microscopic representations in the same simulation using issue,adynamichybridmodelgivestheabilitytomove,resize,
the clusters principle. splitandmergetheclustersoftheroadnetwork(seefigure5).
• to switch between these different levels of representation
locally depending: Limits of the existing solutions
– on the simulation needs; for instance understanding
To the best of our knowledge, the only other work describ-
the source of a traffic congestion,
ing a dynamic hybrid model is Sewall et al. (2011). However,
– on the computation constraints; for instance manag-
authors focus on the visualization of data rather than accurate
ing the CPU load,
simulation of traffic flow: zooming in a part of the network
• to experiment both macroscopic and microscopic dy- triggers a micro representation on this area. Thus, there is no
namic routing strategies, i.e. road load balancing strate- bi-directional information exchange between the micro and
gies, and others dynamic trafic control. macro representations.

===== PAGE 3 =====

Fig.2. Illustrationoftheusecase”ReducetheCPUloadduringpeakhours”.
Fig.3. Illustrationoftheusecase”BalancetheCPUloadbetweenclusters”.
Fig.4. Illustrationoftheusecase”Findoutthereasonofatrafficjam”.
Fig.5. Dynamichybridmodelofashockwavephenomenon.

===== PAGE 4 =====

DYNAMICHYBRIDTRAFFICMODELING:ISSUESAND On the other hand, switching from macro to micro requires
PROPOSEDSOLUTIONS to perform a local warm-up so the speed, density and flow of
Main issues vehicles can be accurate.
Formalmulti-levelagent-basedmeta-model: Regularmulti-
First, we identify the main issues to address in order to
agent based simulation meta-models lack the structure to
simulate dynamic hybrid traffic models accurately.
manage such hybrid approaches: their representation of the
1) How can the simulated network be structured to switch
agents, the environment and the temporal dynamics of the
between different models at runtime?
system is designed to support a single viewpoint. Multi-level
2) How to switch between different models (particularly
agent-based modeling is an interesting approach to simulate
from macro to micro)?
such systems. Indeed it offers a large range of techniques to
3) Howthetemporalitiesofthedifferentinteractingmodels
dynamically adapt the level of detail of simulations, couple
can be managed to avoid bias?
heterogenous models or detect and reify emergent phenom-
In the next section, we present possible generic solutions to ena (Gaud et al., 2008; Gil-Quijano et al., 2012; Picault and
these issues. Mathieu, 2011).
Many meta-models and simulation engines dedicated to
Proposed solutions
multi-level agent-based modeling have been proposed in the
Dynamic decomposition of the network into autonomous
literature.Seee.g.Morvan(2013)foracompletereview.Man-
clusters: The network can be dynamically decomposed into
aging multiple viewpoints on the same phenomenon induces
autonomous clusters. Each cluster operates autonomously and
the use of heterogeneous time models, thus raising issues
simulates the traffic flow using a model of its own. However,
related to time and consistency. However, simulation bias can
cutting the road network is not arbitrary, to avoid incoherent
be controlled by rules that constraint perceptions, influence
situation like having an area of a few square meters. To
production and reaction computation, according to causality
ensure the integrity of the simulation, a minimum cut is
and coherence principles (Morvan et al., 2011). To deal with
deducted from sensors: the entry and exit points of a cluster
thisissue,wedevelopedagenericapproachcalledSIMILARto
arenecessarilysensors.Thus,theroadnetworkcanbeviewed
design simulations (see Morvan and Kubera (2014) for more
as a directed graph of interconnected sensors. Each arc of the
detailed information about the main principles of SIMILAR).
graph represents a path joining two sensors directly, without
Indeed,thisapproachreliesonamulti-level,influence-reaction
going through an intermediate sensor.
and agent-based knowledge representation, more fitting to
A cluster is then characterized by input and output sensors
multiple viewpoints (Ferber and Mu¨ller, 1996; Michel, 2007;
and eventually sensors situated inside the cluster. The mini-
Soyez et al., 2013).
mum cutting of the road network is then defined by:
• a cluster representing the outside of the simulated net-
THEJAM-FREESIMULATOR
work, Architecture
• clustersrepresentingminimalsubsetsintheroadnetwork; JAM-FREE is based on a multi-level architecture (see e.g.,
aclusterisminimalifthereisnosensorinsidethecluster. figure 7):
Clustersofasimulationarenecessarilydisjointcombination • the infrastructure level models the components of the
of minimum contiguous clusters. An example of minimal road network; the naming and identification of road
cutting is depicted in figure 6. Each cluster transmits mean network components follow the Se´tra (Service d’e´tudes
speed and flow information from its bounding sensors to the sur les transports, les routes et leurs am’enagements, is a
upstream and downstream clusters. In the case of a macro French technical service of the Ministe`re de l’E´cologie,
cluster, this information is integrated using flow conservation du De´veloppement Durable et de l’E´nergie dedicated to
and prediction formulas to compute the flow at next time. transportation issues) specification (Se´tra, 2010).
In the case of a micro cluster, it consists in changing the • the control level is the core of the dynamic hybrid
frequency of generation of vehicles and their speed based on approach: it manages the dynamic decomposition of the
data from the sensors, and measuring the number of vehicles network into clusters.
passing the sensors and their speed, for a given time interval • thesimulationdependentlevelsmodelthetrafficdynamic
to deduct the sensor data. using a dedicated representation; by default, three traffic
Aggregation and disaggregation of traffic variables: When levelsareconsidered:microscopic,macroscopicanddata-
runningthesimulation,anagentmanagesthedecompositionof driven (i.e., using real data).
theclusternetwork.Thisagentencapsulatesrules,determining
whether the model used in a cluster must be changed (for
Models used in JAM-FREE
example from micro to macro) and determining whether the Roadnetworkstructure: Weconsiderthattheroadnetwork
area of a cluster must be enlarged or reduced according to the can be divided dynamically into subsets called clusters. The
needs of the simulation (see the previous section). Switching trafficissimulatedoneachclusterusingvariousheterogeneous
from micro to macro is straightforward: the mean speed and modelsdependingonthesituation:eitheramicroscopicmodel
flowinsidetheclustercanbedirectlycomputedfromsensors. or a macroscopic model. For computation time efficiency

===== PAGE 5 =====

Fig.6. Minimalcuttingofanetwork
• Highway extraction node
Microscopic level models: The behavior of a vehicle can
be seen as the sum of three different parts:
• A navigation behavior when the current lane of the
vehicle does not lead to the desired destination of the
vehicle. This behavior consists in changing the lane of
the vehicle until the current lane of the vehicle leads to
the desired destination.
• An overtaking behavior when the vehicle either wants
to increase its speed by changing its lane, or when the
vehicle has to swerve because a faster vehicle is tailing
it.
• Abehaviorwhennolanechangeisrequired(acceleration
model).
Fig.7. Multi-levelarchitectureofJAM-FREE JAM-FREE implements the highly used Intelligent-Driver
Model (IDM) to model the acceleration behavior of vehi-
cles (Kesting et al., 2010).
reasons,wechoosenottomodeltheroadnetworkataphysical IDM is a microscopic traffic flow model, i.e., each vehicle-
level.Indeed,suchamodelrequiresthevehiclestointerpreta driver combination constitutes an active ”particle” in the sim-
large continuous zone of asphalt with blank lines as separated ulation.Suchmodelscharacterizethetrafficstateatanygiven
lanes. Such computations are unnecessary complex, since in time by the positions and speeds of all simulated vehicles. In
our use case (France) rational drivers usually never drive over caseofmulti-lanetraffic,thelaneindexcomplementsthestate
the blank lines separating the lanes if they are not overtaking. description. More specifically, IDM is a car-following model.
To keep the model simple, the road network is only modeled In such models, the decision of any driver to accelerate or
at a semantic level. to brake depends only on his or her own speed, and on the
The road network is modeled as a set of interconnected positionandspeedofthe”leadingvehicle”immediatelyahead.
roads. Each road contains a set of lanes (usually from 1 to 5). The model structure of IDM can be described as follows:
Roads also contain vertical signs (e.g. stop sign, speed limit
• the influencing factors (model input) are the own speed
sign) that are bond either to all the lanes or to specific lanes
v,thebumper-to-bumpergapstotheleadingvehicle,and
(e.g. extraction lane in the highway, slow vehicles lane). In
the relative speed (speed difference) of the two vehicles
our model, we support a specific subset of the french vertical
(positive when approaching),
signs.Theconnectionpointsoftheroadsarecallednodes.We
• the model output is the acceleration chosen by the driver
distinguish different types of nodes:
for this situation,
• Crossroads nodes • the model parameters describe the driving style, i.e.,
• Roundabout nodes whether the simulated driver drives slow or fast, careful
• Highway insertion node or reckless.

===== PAGE 6 =====

Lane changes takes place, if: Traffic generation: In our model, each input point is a
• the potential new target lane is more attractive, i.e., the special connector that will generate traffic on the road it is
”incentive criterion” is satisfied, attached to. Note that such a connector has to be created and
• and the change can be performed safely, i.e., the ”safety put on each lane where the traffic appears. The creation of
criterion” is satisfied. vehicles is managed by a traffic input point agent. Various
implementation of this agent currently exist:
JAM-FREEimplementsthelanechangingmodelMOBIL(Kest-
ing et al., 2007). • ”Flow-mass traffic input point” agents, generating the
traffic flow using a flow-mass parameter
Chosenaccelerationandlanechangingmodelsarepresented
in detail in the JAM-FREE documentation. • ”Scriptedtrafficinputpoint”agents,generatingthetraffic
flow using user-defined events. The created vehicles and
Macroscopic level model: Any macroscopic traffic flow
the creation dates are manually specified by the users.
model can be used in JAM-FREE since it defines generic
connectorstoconvertmicro/macrorepresentations.Bydefault, A first experimentation
a generic implementation of the METANET model is pro-
To validate the models implemented in JAM-FREE, as well
vided (Messner and Papageorgiou, 1990). METANET is based
as the flow (dis)aggregation algorithms, we performed a first
on a second order macroscopic model and uses the following
hybrid simulation using real data from of the A25 highway
traffic flow equations:
in France. We simulate a 4780m portion of the highway, de-
T composedinto11clusters(seefig.8).Theclusterscontaining
s
ρ(k+1)=ρ(k)+ [q (k)−q(k)] (1)
i i L i−1 i insertion or extraction lanes are simulated with a microscopic
i
model, the others with a macroscopic model.
where, ρ, defines the traffic density in (veh/km/lane). L, k
i i
and T represent, the segment length (km), the simulation step
s
and its duration, respectively. q in (vehicles/h) defines the
i
traffic flow in the segment i:
q =ρv (2)
i i i
The speed v in (km/h) represents the velocity of vehicles in
i
segment i at time kT.
s
v =V (ρ) (3)
i e i
where V (ρ) is the static speed-density characteristic called
e i
a fundamental diagram. The momentum equation is obtained
by introducing two small constant parameters in (3). Such
equation reads:
T Tη
s s
v(k+1)= [V (ρ)−v(k)]+ v(k)[v (k)−v (k)]
i e i i i i−1 i+1
τ L
i Fig.8. Descriptionofthesimulatednetwork
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
relaxation convection
The obtained results permit to validate the performance
−
T s ν ρ i+1 (k)−ρ i (k)
(4)
of JAM-FREE as well as its microscopic and macroscopic
τL i ρ i (k)+κ models. We cannot present them all in this paper for an
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) evidentquestionofspace.Thefigure9showssomesimulation
anticipation
results in cluster R8 (i.e., after (dis)aggregation processes),
The first term of equation (4) represents relaxation to the using typical model parameter values (i.e., without specific
equilibrium. This is the most dominant term in the equation calibration).
since the other terms manifest their effects only when there
are (occasional) fluctuations in the traffic speed and density
CONCLUSIONANDPERSPECTIVES
upstream or downstream. This relaxation term describes the In this paper a first step towards the implementation of a
fact that the drivers adjust their speeds to the equilibrium dynamic hybrid model was proposed. The main objectives of
speed-density characteristic V (ρ) according to the reaction this step were to identify use-cases, propose generic solutions
e i
time τ. The second term, represents the convection, i.e., to the dynamic hybrid simulation problem and study the core
the influence of the upstream traffic mean speed. The third aspects of the multi-level simulation approach. These ideas
term, called ”anticipation”, translates the effect of drivers have then been implemented in a simulator called JAM-FREE.
reacting to downstream traffic density variations. Drivers tend The first experiments using real data allow us to validate
todecelerateifthedownstreamdensityishigherandaccelerate several issues addressed in the paper and the implemented
if it is lower. ν, κ are a model parameters. models.Furtherworkswillfocusontheintroductionofseveral

===== PAGE 7 =====

0.8 agent-basedmodels,PrinciplesandPracticeofMulti-Agent
0.7 real Systems, Vol. 7057 of LNCS, Springer, pp. 620–635.
simulated
Joueiai,M.,vanLint,H.andHoogendoorn,S.(2013),Generic
0.6
solutions for consistency problems in multi-scale traffic
0.5
flow models - analysis and preliminary results, 16th Int.
0.4
IEEE Conf. on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC),
0.3
pp. 310–315.
0.2 Kesting,A.,Treiber,M.andHelbing,D.(2007),Generallane-
2000 4000 6000 8000
changing model MOBIL for car-following models, Trans-
(a) density(vehicle/m) portation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board 1999(1), 86–94.
32 Kesting, A., Treiber, M. and Helbing, D. (2010), Enhanced
real intelligent driver model to access the impact of driving
30 simulated
strategies on traffic capacity, Philosophical Transactions of
28 theRoyalSocietyA:Mathematical,PhysicalandEngineer-
ing Sciences 368(1928), 4585–4605.
26
Magne,L.,Rabut,S.andGabard,J.(2000),Towardsanhybrid
24 macro-micro traffic flow simulation model, Proceedings of
2000 4000 6000 8000
the INFORMS Salt Lake City String 2000 Conference .
time (s) Mammar, S.and Lebacque, J. and Haj-Salem, H. (2006),
Hybrid model based on second-order traffic model, 85th
(b) speed(m/s)
Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board.
Fig.9. SimulationresultsinclusterR8 Messner,A.andPapageorgiou,M.(1990),Metanet:Amacro-
scopic simulation program for motorway networks, Traffic
Engineering & Control 31(8-9), 466–470.
trafficmodelsallowingtothepractitionersmultiplechoicesin Michel, F. (2007), The IRM4S model: the influence/reaction
functionoftheirsimulationobjectiveandthevalidationofthe principle for multiagent based simulation, Proc. of 6th
identified use-cases. Moreover, a more accurate macro/micro Int. Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
switching algorithm is being developed using a sophisticated (AAMAS), pp. 1–3.
continuous warm-up process. In addition, some control strate- Morvan, G. (2013), Multi-level agent-based modeling - a
gies will be added to JAM-FREE in order to evaluate their literature survey, CoRR abs/1205.0561.
impact on the global behavior of the networks. Morvan, G. and Kubera, Y. (2014), SIMILAR documentation.
http://www.lgi2a.univ-artois.fr/∼morvan/similar.html.
REFERENCES Morvan,G.,Veremme,A.andDupont,D.(2011),IRM4MLS:
the influence reaction model for multi-level simulation,
Bourrel, E. and Lesort, J. (2003), Mixing micro and macro Multi-Agent-Based Simulation XI, Vol. 6532 of LNCS,
representations of traffic flow: a hybrid model based on the Springer, pp. 16–27.
LWR theory, 82th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Picault, S. and Mathieu, P. (2011), An interaction-oriented
Research Board . modelformulti-scalesimulation,Procofthe22ndInt.Joint
El hmam, M. (2006), Contribution a` la mode´lisation et a` la Conf. on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI Press, pp. 332–337.
simulation hybride du flux de trafic, PhD thesis, Universite´ Poschinger, A., Kates, R. and Keller, H. (2002), Coupling of
d’Artois. concurrentmacroscopicandmicroscopictrafficflowmodels
Espie´, S., Gattuso, D. and Galante, F. (2006), Hybrid traffic using hybrid stochastic and deterministic disaggregation,
model coupling macro- and behavioral microsimulation, Transportation and Traffic Theory for the 21st century .
85th Annual Meeting of Transportation Research Board. Se´tra(2010),Identificationetlocalisationsurlereseauroutier
Ferber, J. and Mu¨ller, J.-P. (1996), Influences and reaction: national, Technical report, Se´tra, 110 rue de Paris 77171
a model of situated multiagent systems, 2nd International Sourdun - France. http://dtrf.setra.fr/pdf/pj/Dtrf/0005/Dtrf-
Conference on Multi-agent systems (ICMAS’96), pp. 72– 0005792/DT5792.pdf
79. Sewall, J., Wilkie, D. and Lin, M. C. (2011), Interactive
Gaud, N., Galland, S., Gechter, F., Hilaire, V. and Koukam, hybrid simulation of large-scale traffic, ACM Transaction
A. (2008), Holonic multilevel simulation of complex sys- on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH Asia) 30(6).
tems : Application to real-time pedestrians simulation in Soyez,J.-B.,Morvan,G.,Dupont,D.andMerzouki,R.(2013),
virtual urban environment, Simulation Modelling Practice A methodology to engineer and validate dynamic multi-
and Theory 16, 1659–1676. level multi-agent based simulations, Multi-Agent-Based
Gil-Quijano, J., Louail, T. and Hutzler, G. (2012), From SimulationXIII,Vol.7838ofLNCS,Springer,pp.130–142.
biological to urban cells: Lessons from three multilevel
