===== PAGE 1 =====

A Discrete-Event Mesoscopic Traffic Simulation Model for Hybrid
Traffic simulation
Wilco Burghout, Haris N. Koutsopoulos and Ingmar Andreasson
Abstract—The paper presents a mesoscopic traffic simulation speed/density relationships on the link, use stochastic queue-
model, particularly suited for the development of integrated servers at the nodes to account for delays caused by traffic
meso-micro traffic simulation models. The model combines a signals and the interaction with traffic from other directions
number of the recent advances in simulation modeling, such as
(e.g. FASTLANE [3]). DYNAMEQ [5-7] works in a similar
discrete-event time resolution and combined queue-server and
fashion, but the link dynamics of vehicles are captured by a
speed-density modeling, with a number of new features such as
simplified car-following relationship. Lanes are explicitly
the ability to integrate with microscopic models to create hybrid
traffic simulation. The ability to integrate with microscopic represented including lane-change operations.
models extends the area of use to include evaluation of ITS Macroscopic models [22, 23] are mostly used for planning
systems, which often require the detailed modeling of vehicles in applications, and operations control design, involving large
areas of interest, combined with a more general modeling of
networks and long time periods. Microscopic models (e.g.
large surrounding areas to capture network effects of local
[14]) are suited to model vehicle interactions at the high
phenomena. The paper discusses the structure of the model,
level of detail required for the evaluation of many Intelligent
presents a framework for integration with micro models, and
illustrates its validity through a case study with a congested Transportation Systems (ITS), but are limited to small areas,
network north of Stockholm. It also compares its performance due to the large amounts of input data, and the extensive
with a hybrid model applied to the same network. calibration requirements.
Mesoscopic models provide a middle ground with their
I. INTRODUCTION
ability to model large networks with limited network coding
T R AFFIC simulation models are usually macroscopic, and calibration effort, while providing a better representation
mesoscopic or microscopic. Macroscopic models of the traffic dynamics and individual travel behavior than
represent traffic as a (indivisible) flow, whereas microscopic their macroscopic counterparts. Mesoscopic models are
models describe the behavior of individual drivers, their used for both planning, and real time (online) operations.
vehicles and their interactions. Mesoscopic models maintain They are more flexible than macroscopic models for
individual vehicle representation but with a more aggregate modeling important elements, such as travel behavior (i.e.
representation of traffic dynamics. route choice). However, they are still limited in their ability
A number of mesoscopic models exists in the literature. to represent detailed traffic operations, especially as related
CONTRAM [1], for instance, represents the network by to ITS systems.
nodes and links, and the vehicles on those links are grouped In response to the need for models that can capture both
into packets that travel from origins to destinations (although local traffic phenomena in detail, and effects on a larger
packets may consist of only one vehicle). DYNAMIT [2] surrounding network, hybrid models have recently appeared
uses individual vehicles moving along segments according to [8-13]. [8, 9, 12, 13] integrate mesoscopic and microscopic
speed-density relationships and queuing models. Lanes are models, while [10-11] integrate macroscopic and
represented in detail only when congestion builds up and microscopic models.
queues develop. These queues are then lane-specific. The objective of this paper is to present a new mesoscopic
Operations at intersections are captured by the corresponding model, MEZZO, which combines the state-of-the-art
capacities. DYNASMART [4] also uses speed/density mesoscopic modeling mechanisms with the ability to be
relationships but has adopted a more detailed representation integrated with microscopic models. The paper also presents
of signalized intersections (at the traffic light level) to model a framework for the integration of microscopic and
delays at these facilities. mesoscopic simulation models.
Other models that represent individual vehicles following The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First
the general structure of MEZZO is described in terms of
network representation and the mechanisms to capture the
Manuscript received March 20, 2006.
traffic dynamics. An overall integration framework is also
Wilco Burghout and Ingmar Andreasson are with the Centre for Traffic
Research, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, SE-100 44 Sweden discussed. The results of the application on a small network
(Wilco Burghout is the corresponding author, phone: +46 8 7908896; fax: in Stockholm are presented. These results are compared to
+46 8 7908461; e-mail: wilco@ctr.kth.se).
the application of a hybrid model of MEZZO and
Haris N. Koutsopoulos is with the Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, NorthEastern University, Boston, MA 02115- MITSIMLab [14] on the same network.
5000 USA (e-mail: haris@coe.neu.edu).

===== PAGE 2 =====

II. MEZZO When a vehicle enters a link, it enters the running part
with a speed that is a function of the density on the running
Many mesoscopic (and microscopic) simulation models are
part. A large number of functional forms for speed-density
time-based. As a result, even in situations where no changes
functions (see for example, [15] [16]) have been discussed in
in traffic state are occurring, such as when vehicles are
the literature. Following other models (e.g. [2], [4]) the
queued in a traffic jam, the ‘state’ of each vehicle is re-
speed-density relationship in eq. (1) is currently employed:
evaluated in every time-step. MEZZO is an event-based
simulator with changes in traffic states calculated only V , if k<k
free min
‘when something happens’ (DYNAMEQ [5-7] is another   ( )    k- k a  b
exa
E
m
ve
p
n
le
ts
o
i
f
n
e
M
ve
E
nt
Z
-b
Z
a
O
s e
a
d
r e
s i
d
m
e
u
fi
l
n
at
e
i
d
o n
b
)
y
.
vehicles entering a link,
V(k)=

V
min
+V
free
- V
min 
1-


k max -
m
k m
in
in 

  
if k˛ [k
min
,k
max
] (1)
exiting a link, making a new route choice, etc (see [8] for V if k>k
min max
more details). Apart from the computational advantages of
where
this method of simulation, the use of event-based simulation
V(k) = speed assigned to the vehicle
in the mesoscopic model provides a natural way of
k = the current density on the running part of the link
synchronizing with the usually time-based microscopic
V = minimum speed
models. Each time-step of the microscopic model enters as min
V = free flow speed
an external event in the event list of the mesoscopic model. free
k = minimum density
MEZZO is a synthesis of a number of models and min
k = maximum density
max
processes that capture all the important aspects of the
a, b = model parameters
operations of traffic networks. These models and processes
include the network representation, the movement of Different sets of parameters (V min , V freee , k min , k max , a, b)
vehicles on links and intersections, and travel behavior (e.g. can be specified for different link types (e.g. ramp weaving
route choice). section, etc) in order to capture the different performance
characteristics of the various elements of the road network.
A. Network representation
In applying the speed-density relationship, the density is
The traffic network is represented by a graph that consists of calculated on the running part only. This is needed to ensure
nodes and links. The nodes are the points where multiple that there is no double counting of the delay a vehicle
traffic streams join or diverge, such as intersections, on/off experiences. If the density of the whole link were used for
ramps, as well as origins or destinations of traffic. Links the speed/density function that determines the speed of
represent the roadway between such nodes, and are vehicles, the delay caused by the queued vehicles would be
unidirectional. The lanes on a road are not represented counted twice: first in the traversal speed (which is low due
separately. Nodes have usually multiple incoming and to the high density in the queue) and second in the queue
outgoing links, and are considered the main sources of delay. It is also important to note that the traffic dynamics
friction in the traffic streams for the density regime beyond k is captured by the queue-
max
server mechanism at the node, described below.
B. Vehicle movement
The calculated speed is used to estimate the earliest time a
Vehicle movements are governed by the traversal of links
vehicle can reach the downstream node (earliest exit time).
and the crossing of intersections. They are captured by two
The vehicles on the link are ordered according to their
models, the link model and the node model.
earliest exit time, and this defines which vehicles are in the
Link Model. A MEZZO link is divided into two parts, the queue part at any point in time. The queue part at any
running part and the queue part. The queue part starts at the (simulation) time t, is defined to contain those vehicles that
downstream node and grows towards the upstream node, have an earliest exit time smaller than t. In other words it
when the incoming flow exceeds the outgoing capacity. For includes all vehicles that should have exited the link, if it
instance, when a traffic light at the downstream node were not for some delay caused at the downstream node.
becomes red, the queue part will grow. Note that the queue mechanism in MEZZO represents the
The running part is the part of the link that contains additional delay experienced by vehicles on links, caused by
vehicles that are on their way to the downstream node, but limited capacity of turning movements at nodes. This differs
are not (yet) delayed by the downstream capacity limit (for from queues in real life, in which the queuing process
instance the traffic light). This means that the boundary incorporates both the additional delay and the time it takes to
between the running part and queue part is dynamic. It varies advance in the queue towards the stop line.
over time, depending on the variations in the inflow and
Node Model. Links are connected to downstream links
outflow. In the case of an empty link, there is no queue, and
through nodes. Each connection of an incoming to an
the running part occupies the whole link. Conversely, if the
outgoing link represents a turning movement (e.g. the
whole link is full, the queue occupies the whole link, and
through movement). Turning movements have a limited
there is no running part.
capacity for moving vehicles to the corresponding

===== PAGE 3 =====

downstream links. This capacity may depend on various capture the shockwave that travels upstream when a queue
factors. In the case of a signalized intersection, these are begins to dissolve (from the downstream node), the speed of
mainly the green time that is allocated to the turning the start-up shockwave is calculated using the density
movement, possible interactions with opposing turning upstream and downstream of the node [15]:
movements (for instance vehicles in a left turn that wait for w = ( q – q )/( k – k ) (2)
AB A B A B
the traffic going straight ahead in the opposite direction) and
where,
queuing vehicles from other turning movements blocking the w = shockwave speed,
access. In order to capture these complications, signalized AB
q q = flow upstream and downstream of the node,
intersections are represented by signal control objects that A, B
k , k = densities upstream and downstream of the node.
follow signal plans, activating and de-activating specific A B
turning movements at the appropriate times. Using this speed, the earliest exit time of all vehicles in
The capacity of turning movements is represented by the queue-part is updated by calulating when the shockwave
queue-servers. The vehicles that are part of the queue reaches them and how long it would then take them to drive
segment are processed, one a time, by such a server and to the exit (based on the downstream density). This solves a
transferred to the next link, if there is available space). common problem of queue-server mesoscopic models, where
Each turning movement has one or more stochastic turning the space of a vehicle that exits downstream immediately
servers that transfer vehicles to the next link. The number of becomes available upstream. In addition, this feature
servers per turning movement is based on the minimum facilitates the integration with a microscopic model. Such
number of lanes in the incoming and outgoing links. Having integration requires correct handling of start-up shockwaves
one server for each lane through the turning movement, in the mesoscopic model, in case queues spill over the meso-
instead of one for all of them, ensures a more correct micro boundary [8].
headway distribution at the outgoing link, which is important
C. Demand and Travel Behavior
when MEZZO is coupled with a microscopic model, as the
arrival process there needs to be as realistic as possible [8]. The demand is represented by time-dependent origin-
The structure of the model allows for any stochastic process destination (OD) matrices. The model handles multiple
for the servers, but currently a truncated normal distribution vehicle classes based on their length, permissions, and
is used. percentage in the vehicle mix. The traffic generation is based
The turning servers only process the vehicles whose route on a Poisson process for each OD pair so that the inter-
requires them to make that turning. Figure 1 shows three arrival times follow a negative exponential distribution.
turning movements: through, left and right turn. The server The pre-trip route choice in the MEZZO model is based
for the vehicles moving straight cannot process more on a set of known routes and historical link travel times for
vehicles until the destination link has become unblocked. all links. These travel times are time dependent. When a
vehicle is created at an origin, it makes a pre-trip route
choice according to a multinomial logit (MNL) [17] model,
blocked
from the set of known routes that connect its origin to its
destination. Any utility specification may be used, and
Running part Queue Part
models that correct for the violation of the IIA property in
case of overlapping paths (such as CLogit [18] or Path Size
Fig 1. Queue servers at turning movements serving vehicles. Logit [19]) can be easily implemented.
The queue of one turning movement can block access to En-route drivers may switch route if traffic conditions are
the other turning movements. For instance, it may be worse than expected or if they receive travel information.
unlikely that the last vehicle in the queue (diagonal stripes) Again the decision is made using a MNL model that may
could pass the whole queue of vehicles heading straight, and include a bias towards the current path.
make the left turn. On the other hand, it may be possible for MEZZO supports an iterative process for the estimation of
the vehicles heading for the right turn (vertical stripes) to travel times that represents a “learning” mechanism. The set
pass, depending on the exact configuration of the approach of known routes and the historical link travel times are
(e.g. number of lanes and length of turning pockets). Each generated iteratively, starting with the free-flow link travel
turning movement has a queue look-back limit, which is the times, and assigning the shortest paths in the first iteration.
maximum number of vehicles from the front of the (1- The resulting link travel times are weighted with the input
dimensional) queue that a server can “look back” to find a travel times, to provide the ‘historical travel times’ for
vehicle that is heading for its specific turning movement. iteration two, which consists of a new shortest-path search
The queue-servers at the node provide adequate (based on the updated travel times), where the newly found
mechanisms for representing traffic dynamics, such as queue paths are added to the set of known paths from previous
build-up and dissipation. In addition, the model explicitly iterations. This is followed by a new assignment, and the
represents the start-up shockwave of a dissipating queue. To iterations continue until no new paths are found and the
historical link travel times do not change from one iteration

===== PAGE 4 =====

to the next (given a defined margin). This approach is similar a) route choice models with the same structure and
to the one presented in [7]. parameters in the two sub-models, and
b) consistent path choice set (defined over the entire
III. MESO-MICRO INTEGRATION FRAMEWORK
network).
MEZZO has been developed especially to facilitate
To maintain the required consistency in this case, the
integration with microscopic traffic simulation models
micro and meso networks are enhanced with the addition of
(existing, or new models). A generic integration framework,
virtual links that correspond to the paths in the remaining
that is supported by MEZZO’s functionality and modular
network. More specifically, the meso network includes
design, is illustrated in Figure 2 [9].
virtual links for each path connecting boundary nodes in the
micro network. This representation guarantees that each
Common Module
relevant path through the micro model is represented
Travel behaviour Database correctly in the meso route choice. The meso model collects
travel times for the virtual links, and uses them in the route
Pre-trip Network graph
choice like any other link in the network. Similarly the
Travel times
En-Route micro network is expanded with the addition of micro virtual
Paths
links to the micro sub-network. The virtual links allow the
Path generation
OD flows
micro model to deal with en-route choice in the micro sub-
Route choices, Route choices, network. Since each path from an exit point in the micro
Travel Times Travel Times network to a destination in the meso network is represented
by a virtual link in the micro model, a change of route for a
Meso Model Micro Model
Vehicles, vehicle in the micro sub-network can effectively mean a
Traffic conditions
different exit point into the meso network. There are no
Fig. 2. Hybrid simulation framework limitations in the framework regarding the number of virtual
links, nor the recalculation of the virtual links due to
The common module consists of models and components
shared by both the meso and micro models. The travel changing traffic conditions.
behavior component in the common module uses the These considerations simplify the initial architecture
database that contains the complete network representation, considerably in the case where integration of existing
link travel times and known paths for the entire network. simulation models takes place (Figure 3).
Both the micro and meso models supply descriptions of their
sub-networks, from which the network representation is
Meso Micro
constructed. Each time a vehicle makes a route choice vehicles
(whether in micro or meso), the common module is invoked. Network traffic Sub-network
For the common route choice module to operate properly, Virtual Links conditions Virtual Links
the meso and micro models need to update the travel time
database regularly with the link travel times in their sub- Link travel times Link travel times
travel
networks. Paths times Sub-paths
The common module also includes the OD matrix for the
OD flows
entire network. To simplify the information exchange and
facilitate a transparent data input interface, it is assumed that Route choice: Route choice:
all origin and destination nodes in the network belong to the • Pre-trip • En-route
meso sub-network. This assumption is not restrictive, since • En-route
an origin or destination node in the micro area can always be
designated as a boundary node in meso connected directly to Fig. 3. Simplified hybrid simulation framework
the micro sub-network.
Under this architecture, and based on the OD matrix
The above architecture is applicable in the case where the representation discussed earlier, the meso model is solely
two simulation models to be integrated have an open responsible for all pre-trip decisions, while en-route
architecture or are new models, developed with integration in decisions are the responsibility of the respective subnetwork
mind. In integrating existing models, that are not as flexible, (using the correct path definitions residing inside the meso
the implementation of the integration framework needs to be model). This architecture has a number of practical
adjusted to minimize inter-model communication, and use advantages compared to the initial one. The initial
functionalities that are implemented separately in each model architecture, preferable in the case of a new meso-micro
in a consistent way. For example, the simulation models model, requires large amounts of communication overhead
may have their own route choice models. In this case, when combining two existing models. With the above
consistent route choice behavior across sub-models requires modifications this overhead is avoided.
two conditions:

===== PAGE 5 =====

IV. CASE STUDY
The results overall indicate that, given the high level of
The performance of MEZZO was validated in a case study
congestion in the network, both models reproduce the flows
with a heavily congested network north of Stockholm
over time at the measurement locations with reasonable
(Brunnsviken). We report the results of the performance of
accuracy. According to the RMSNE values, the hybrid
both MEZZO and compare it against the performance of a
model (MiMe) performed better than MEZZO alone, due to
hybrid model, MiMe. MiMe consists of MEZZO integrated
the fact that the signal controlled portion of the network is
with MITSIMLab [14]. The integration took place following
now simulated at microscopic detail. The Theil U value
the framework described earlier.
sensor indicates that the MEZZO model has a larger systematic
locations error than MiMe. To further explore the nature of the
differences, Table 1 reports the RMSNE for sensors located
Meso in different parts of the network (Meso network is the part of
E4 the network modeled by Meso in the hybrid model, and
Micro network is the part of the network modeled by
MITSIMLab in the hybrid model). The part of the network
modeled by MITSIMLab in the hybrid model application is
very congested and contains a number of complex signalized
M icro
intersections.
While the RMSNE values show small improvement for
the hybrid model over the MEZZO model alone, the Theil U
Fig. 4. Brunnsviken Validation Network
statistics highlight the importance of modeling congested
parts of the network in detail. In particular, the UM
The northern part of the network (Figure 4) consists
proportion has a value of 0.147 for the MEZZO model and
mainly of freeways, whereas the southern part consists of a
0.075 for the Hybrid model. The UM value measures the bias
number of complex intersections with coordinated signal
in the model. Values higher than 0.10 indicate high bias and
control and a large roundabout. In the hybrid model the
are not desirable. Clearly, the detailed modeling of the
northern part (meso) is simulated by MEZZO and the
intersections in the southern part of the network has led to a
southern part (micro) by MITSIMLab [14]. The area is
significant reduction in the bias. Figure 5 shows the flows at
highly congested during the studied period, which is the
the north-west sensor location (E4) of the network in the
morning peak, 6:45 – 9:00 a.m. Sensor count data from 12
southbound direction. It illustrates a good fit of the MEZZO
locations across the network, averaged over 15 minute
simulated data to the measured flows, although for the first
intervals, was available from May 2000. The OD matrix
15 min. period MEZZO underestimates the flows, due to
used for this case study was estimated in [20]. The results
simulation starting from an empty network (i.e. it is the
are based on 10 replications of the simulation model.
warm-up period).
The performance of the hybrid model is compared against
MEZZO alone using the RMSNE (Root Mean Squared
1600
Normalized Error) relative to observed flow values and
1400
Theil inequality coefficient U [21]. The U error proportions
UM, US, and UC are also used to measure the systematic 1200
(bias) (UM), variance (US), and non-systematic (covariance) 1000
(UC) proportions of the errors. For a more detailed 800 Actual
description of the Theil U statistic and its use as a goodness- 600 Mezzo
of-fit measure see [8]. 400
Table 1 summarizes the results. 200
0
MEZZO Hybrid (MiMe) 06:45 07:00 07:15 07:30 07:45 08:00 08:15 08:30 08:45
RMSNE
Entire network 16% 15%
Fig. 5. Flows E4 Southbound, MEZZO
Meso network 13% 11%
In summary, the results illustrate the importance of the
Micro network 18% 17%
more detailed representation. Not only the accuracy of the
Theil U 0.055 0.054
simulation improves in the micro network but also in the
UM 0.147 0.075 meso network, presumably due to better flow propagation.
US 0.002 0.017 In addition, the results point to an inherent limitation of
UC 0.852 0.909 mesoscopic models rooted at their more aggregate
representation of intersection operations. In particular, the
Table. 1. Brunnsviken Validation Results
)enal/h/hev(
wolF
Time

===== PAGE 6 =====

model bias increases when simulating complex facilities. Board, Washington DC, 2003.
This behavior is one of the motivations for the development [8] W. Burghout, "Hybrid Microscopic-Mesoscopic Traffic
of hybrid models that combine mesoscopic simulation for Simulation," PhD thesis. Stockholm: Royal Institute of
most of the network with microscopic simulation of the Technology, 2004, pp. 210.
critical facilities. [9] W. Burghout, H. Koutsopoulos, and I. Andreasson,
More calibration and validation results for both MEZZO "Hybrid mesoscopic-microscopic traffic simulation,"
Transportation Research Record: 1934, pp. 218-225,
and the hybrid model, including speed data, can be found in
2005.
[8]. In addition, both models need to be validated more
[10] E. Bourrel, "Modélisation dynamique de l'ecoulement
extensively, especially with travel time data, in addition to
du traffic routier: du macroscopique au microscopique."
flow data.
PhD thesis, Lyon: L' Institut National des Sciences
Appliquées de Lyon, 2003.
V. CONCLUSION
[11] E. Bourrel and J.-B. Lesort, "Mixing Micro and Macro
In this paper a new mesoscopic model is presented, which is Representations of Traffic Flow: a Hybrid Model Based
especially suited for integration in hybrid microscopic- on the LWR Theory.," Transportation Research Board,
mesoscopic models. It combines a number of recent Washington DC, 2003.
advances in simulation modeling with new features, such as [12] Q. Yang and H. Slavin, "High Fidelity, Wide Area
start-up shockwaves, to create the flexibility necessary for Traffic Simulation Model." Caliper Corporation, Boston,
integration with microscopic models. The model is validated USA., 2002.
on a network in North Stockholm and the results show a [13] Q. Yang and D. Morgan, "A Hybrid Traffic Simulation
good replication of the actual conditions. Model," presented at 85th Meeting of the Transportation
However, the real potential of the model is its seamless Research Board CD-ROM, Washington DC, 2006.
integration in the context of hybrid microscopic-mesoscopic [14] M. Ben-Akiva, H. N. Koutsopoulos, R. Mishalani, and
models. In such models the more complicated areas in a Q. Yang, "Simulation Laboratory for Evaluating
traffic network (such as large roundabouts, complex Dynamic Traffic Management Systems," ASCE Journal
intersections) benefit from the additional detail provided by of Transportation Engineering, vol. 123, 1997.
the microscopic component. The results presented in this [15] A. D. May, Traffic Flow Fundamentals. NJ: Englewood
paper support the above observation and highlight the Cliffs, 1990.
importance of hybrid simulation models. [16] J. M. DelCastillo and F. G. Benitez, "On the functional
form of the speed-density relationship I: general theory,"
REFERENCES Transportation Research, vol. 29B, pp. 373-389, 1995.
[1] D. R. Leonard, P. Power, and N. B. Taylor, [17] M. E. Ben-Akiva and S. R. Lerman, Discrete Choice
"CONTRAM: structure of the model," Transportation Analysis: Theory and Application to Travel Demand.
Research Laboratory, Crowthorn TRL Report RR 178, Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1985.
1989. [18] E. Cascetta, A. Nuzzolo, F. Russo, and A. Vitetta, "A
[2] Ben-Akiva, M., M. Bierlaire, D. Burton, H.N. Modified Logit Route Choice Model Overcoming Path
Koutsopoulos, and R. Mishalani, “Network State Overlapping Problems: Specification and some
Estimation and Prediction for Real-Time Transportation Calibration Results for Interurban Networks," presented
Mangement Applications,” Networks and Spatial at Thirteenth International Symposium on Transportation
Economics, Vol 1, No. 3/4, pp 293-318, 2001. and Traffic Theory, Lyon, France, 1996.
[3] C. Gawron, "Simulation-Based Traffic Assignment; [19] M. S. Ramming, "Network Knowledge and Route
Computing User Equilibria in Large Street Networks." Choice," PhD thesis, Cambridge MA, USA: dept. Civil
PhD thesis, Cologne: University of Cologne, 1998. and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute
[4] R. Jayakrishnan, H. S. Mahmassani, and T. Y. Hu, "An of Technology, 2002.
Evaluation Tool for Advanced Traffic Information and [20] T. Toledo, H. Koutsopoulos, A. Davol, M. E. Ben-
Management Systems in Urban Networks," Akiva, W. Burghout, I. Andreasson, T. Johansson, and C.
Transportation Research C, vol. 2C, pp. 129-147, 1994. Lundin, "Calibration and validation of microscopic
[5] M. Mahut, "A multi-lane extension of the Space-Time traffic simulation tools: Stockholm Case Study,"
Queue Model of Traffic Dynamics," presented at Transportation Research Record, vol. 1831, pp. 65-75,
TRISTAN IV, Azores Islands, 2001. 2003.
[6] M. Mahut, M. Florian, and N. Tremblay, "Application of [21] H. Theil, Economic forecasts and policy. Amsterdam:
a simulation-based dynamic traffic assignment model," North Holland, 1961.
IEEE 5th Int. Conf. on Intelligent Transportation [22] Elloumi, N., H. Haj-Salem & M. Papageorgiou,
Systems, Signapore, 2002. METACOR: A macroscopic Modelling Tool for Urban
[7] M. Mahut, M. Florian, and N. Tremblay, "Space-Time Corridor. TRISTAN, Capri, 1994.
Queues and Dynamic Traffic Assignment: A model, [23] Daganzo, C., The lagged cell-transmission model.
algorithm and applications," Transportation Research International Symposium on Transportation and Traffic
Theory, A. Ceder, Ed., New York, Pergamon, 1999.
