===== PAGE 1 =====

Hybrid Traffic Simulation Models:
Vehicle Loading at Meso – Micro Boundaries
Wilco Burghout
wilco@ctr.kth.se
Assistant Professor
Center for Traffic Simulation (CTR)
Royal Institute of Technology, SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden
Haris N. Koutsopoulos
haris@coe.neu.edu
Associate Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115-5000, USA

===== PAGE 2 =====

Hybrid Traffic Simulation Models:
Vehicle Loading at Meso – Micro Boundaries
Wilco Burghout1
Haris N. Koutsopoulos2
Abstract. Traffic simulation models, especially microscopic, are becoming popular and used to
address a wide range of problems, from planning to operations. However, for applications with large
scale networks microscopic models are not practical because of input data and calibration
requirements. Hybrid models, that combine simulation models at different levels of detail have the
potential to address these practical issues. The paper presents a framework for implementing meso-
micro hybrid models that facilitate consistent representation of traffic dynamics. Furthermore, the
paper examines in detail an important element that impacts the consistent representation of traffic
dynamics, the loading of vehicles from the meso to the micro model. A new loading method is
presented that shows superior performance compared to existing approaches. The method is useful
not only in the context of hybrid models, but also for microscopic models on their own. A case study
illustrates the importance of the method in improving the fidelity of both hybrid and pure microscopic
models.
1. Introduction
While microscopic traffic simulation is becoming ever more popular, especially in the evaluation of
advanced traffic management systems and ITS, the amount of effort needed for model calibration and
the preparation of input data often inhibits its use on large networks. Recently, hybrid mesoscopic-
microscopic models have appeared (Burghout, 2004; Burghout, Koutsopoulos, and Andreasson, 2005;
Yang and Morgan, 2006; Shi and Ziliaskopoulos, 2006) that allow for detailed microscopic simulation
of specific areas of interest, while simulating the remaining areas in lesser detail on mesoscopic level.
Since mesoscopic simulation has a more aggregate representation of the roadway and the vehicle
interactions, it requires much less effort in calibration and preparation of input data (especially coding
of the road network). In addition, a number of hybrid macroscopic-microscopic models have appeared
recently (Bourrel and Lesort, 2003; Magne, Rabut and Gabard, 2000; Poschinger, Kates and Meier,
2000; Espie, Gattuso and Galante, 2006; Mammar, Lebaque and Haj-Salem, 2006).
Development and implementation of hybrid models that combine traffic simulation models at different
levels of detail require the resolution of a number of issues, some of them related to the interaction of
the two models at their boundaries. Important among those issues is the consistency in traffic
dynamics at the meso and micro network boundaries.
The objective of this paper is twofold: to a) present a general framework for the implementation of
hybrid simulation models that satisfies the various integration requirements; and b) discuss in detail
one important aspect that has serious implications for the validity of simulation models in general and
hybrid models in particular. This aspect is the mechanism used to load vehicles arriving from the
mesoscopic area into the microscopic area, and affects the consistency of traffic dynamics at the meso-
micro boundaries.
1
Assistant Professor, Center for Traffic Simulation (CTR), Royal Institute of Technology, SE-100 44
Stockholm, Sweden, wilco@ctr.kth.se
2
Associate Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University,
Boston, MA 02115-5000, USA, haris@coe.neu.edu
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses important requirements for
hybrid models of high fidelity and presents a general framework for their implementation. Section 3
looks into modeling traffic dynamics at the micro-meso boundary in more detail. Section 4 discusses
issues related to existing vehicle loading mechanisms and proposes a loading mechanism that
alleviates the negative impact of prior methods. The latter problem is important not only in the
context of hybrid simulation models but also microscopic simulation models on their own. Section 5
illustrates the impact of the loading mechanism through a case study with a small network and section
6 concludes the paper.
2. Hybrid modeling framework
The main requirements that the integration of micro/meso models needs to satisfy in order to develop
reliable hybrid models include:
Consistency in network representation: One of the most basic conditions is general consistency of
the two models in their representation of the road network, especially at the boundaries between the
two models. Consistent network representation has important implications for capacity determination,
and hence impacts traffic dynamics at the boundaries between the models. Furthermore, it impacts the
links included in each model and hence, the consistency with respect to route choice as discussed
below.
Consistency in route choice representation: One of the most important conditions is consistency of
the two models in their representation of paths, and route choice alternatives. The route choice needs
to be consistent across the models to ensure that vehicles will make the same decision given the same
route choice situation (pre-trip or en-route), regardless if they are in the micro or the meso model. This
means also that the representation of the alternative paths needs to be consistent throughout the hybrid
model, as well as the travel times (link costs).
Consistency of traffic dynamics at meso-micro boundaries: Besides the consistency of network
representation, the consistency of traffic dynamics at the boundaries between the meso and micro
submodels needs to be ensured. This means that traffic dynamics upstream and downstream the
boundaries need to be consistent. For instance, when a queue is forming downstream the boundary
point, and grows until it reaches the boundary, it should continue in the other submodel, upstream the
boundary, in a similar way as it would if the boundary had not been there.
Consistency in traffic performance for meso and micro submodels: The two submodels need to be
consistent with each other with regard to the results they produce. Ideally, for those facilities that can
be simulated sufficiently well by both models, the results, in terms of common outputs, such as travel
times, flows, speeds, densities, etc, should be similar. This implies the need for consistent calibration
of the two models.
Transparent communication and data exchanges: The submodels exchange large amounts of data
conveying vehicle characteristics, and downstream traffic conditions. This requires an efficient
synchronization and communication paradigm, and a design that minimizes the amount and frequency
of data exchange. Otherwise the communication overhead may become very large. On the other hand,
aggregation and disaggregation of information at the boundaries may introduce complications, and
should thus be avoided.
Figure 1 shows a general hybrid simulation framework (Burghout, Koutsopoulos and Andreasson,
2005) that facilitates the resolution of the issues discussed above. The travel behavior component in
the common module uses the database that contains the complete network representation, link travel
times and known paths for the entire network. Both the micro and meso models supply descriptions of
their subnetworks, from which the network representation is constructed. Each time a vehicle makes a
route choice (whether in micro or meso), the common module is invoked. For the common route
choice module to operate properly, the meso and micro models need to update the travel time database
regularly with the link travel times in their subnetworks.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

Common Module
Travel
Database
behavior
Network graph
Pre-trip
Travel times
En-Route
Paths
Path
OD flows
generation
Route choices Route choices
Travel times Vehicles, Travel times
Traffic conditions
Meso Micro
Figure 1. Hybrid simulation framework
The common module also includes the OD matrix for the entire network. To simplify the information
exchange and facilitate a transparent data input interface, it is assumed that all origin and destination
nodes in the network belong to the meso subnetwork. This assumption is not restrictive, since an
origin or destination node in the micro area can always be designated as a boundary node in meso,
connected directly to the micro subnetwork. In addition, the meso model contains the entire network
and route representation, by representing the paths inside the micro, from entry nodes to exit nodes, as
virtual links. These virtual links are then used as part of the meso network description, so that the
meso model choice can provide consistent route choice across the submodels. This issue is discussed
in more detail in Burghout, Koutsopoulos and Andreasson, 2005 and Burghout, 2004.
3. Modeling traffic dynamics at meso-micro boundaries
Consistency with respect to traffic dynamics at the boundaries of the two models is critical. The
limited literature on hybrid simulation models focuses on aggregation/disaggregation issues between
the macro and micro representations of traffic (Bourrel and Lesort, 2003; Magne, Rabut and Gabard,
2000; Poschinger, Kates and Meier, 2000; Espie, Gattuso and Galante, 2006; Mammar, Lebaque and
Haj-Salem, 2006). In the case of meso/micro models these issues are avoided since the integration
involves two models that both have a vehicle-based representation of traffic flows. However, other
issues concerning the interfaces between the models remain. In principle, the main sources of
potential inconsistencies at the interface between the meso and micro models are:
• Location of boundaries
• Queue formation and representation
• Vehicle attributes (i.e. determination of speeds and accelerations of vehicles crossing the
micro/meso boundaries)
Location of boundaries. Due to the fact that the meso and micro submodels may represent links and
intersections differently, the positioning of the boundaries between them should be carefully
considered. Placing them at nodes in the overall network would imply that some of the legs of an
intersection would be at meso and some at micro level. This creates the problem of having to deal with
the intersection behavior (signal controlled or otherwise) at different levels of detail. For instance, gap
acceptance models in the micro module require vehicles’ positions, speeds and gaps in the opposing
flows. This information though, is not typically available at the mesoscopic level. It is recommended
therefore, that the boundaries be located in the middle of links, with exactly one entry and one exit
segment.
Queue formation and representation. The placement of boundaries is also dependent on the
homogeneity of traffic conditions. Typically, micro models, due to their level of detail, represent lane-
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

specific queues. Meso models on the other hand, usually do not have lanes. If this is the case, a queue
on one lane in micro, even if the other lanes remain open, will block the boundary node completely,
unless the exchange of vehicles at the boundary is taking place properly. The virtual links in the meso
subnetwork play an important role in solving the problem of inconsistent queue representation.
Virtual links that represent paths that can only use the blocked lanes will be blocked, while virtual
links representing paths that use open lanes will have available capacity and allow the proper
advancement of the corresponding vehicles.
Crossing vehicle attributes. The attributes of the vehicles as they cross the boundaries need to be
properly determined in both directions (micro (cid:1) meso) and (meso (cid:1) micro). Attributes such as
speeds, accelerations, headways, etc should be consistent with the prevailing conditions in the new
segment the vehicle is moving to, otherwise unnecessary shockwaves may propagate upstream. On
the boundary from the meso to the micro (meso (cid:1) micro) submodel, information is exchanged in both
directions: from meso to micro information about vehicles (with a certain speed and at certain time
intervals) needs to be communicated; from micro to meso information about blocking of boundaries
and downstream density needs to be communicated. If the entry to the micro link (downstream of the
boundary point) is blocked, the meso needs to stop vehicles from exiting. The micro model informs
meso when the blockage is removed, so that vehicles can start flowing (over that specific boundary)
again. The micro also sends the density in the vicinity of the boundary to meso, where it is used to
calculate the speed of the shockwave that propagates upstream.
One very important aspect that relates to the questions raised above is the loading of vehicles from the
meso to the micro model. Vehicle loading in hybrid and microscopic simulation models comprises the
generation of initial values for state variables such as headway and speed. This is different from the
correct setting of parameters such as desired speed, which are static inputs, whereas state variables
vary continuously describing the state of the vehicles.
4. Vehicle loading
When vehicles enter the microscopic network, the initial values for speed and headway need to be in
accordance with each other and with the traffic situation downstream (and upstream). Otherwise
immediate deceleration (or acceleration) will occur, affecting the traffic conditions upstream. Correct
vehicle loading is crucial in a hybrid model since the artificially created disturbances propagate
upstream and cause shockwaves in the mesoscopic model. It is equally important for standalone
microscopic simulation models, since it affects the capacity at the entrance of microscopic networks.
This is all the more important since in most applications of microscopic models the vehicles are loaded
at links, rather than at centroids.
The issue of vehicle loading in microscopic models has been largely neglected until now, and
publications and documentation of microscopic traffic models provide little or no information on how
this issue is dealt with. The fact that the loaded vehicles are at the entrance of the network makes it
difficult to observe errors in the loading mechanism since their immediate deceleration (or
acceleration) does not cause an observable disturbance behind them. However, as will be shown in this
paper, they do cause a drop in capacity at the entrances to the network, and therefore may affect the
simulation results by prohibiting the loading of traffic at high volumes, or even cause distortion in the
calibration process if other parameters are adjusted to compensate for the erroneous loading procedure.
In short, incorrect vehicle speeds at micro-meso boundaries or micro origins lead to:
• excessive decelerations and accelerations
• volatility and delayed vehicle entry
• reduced capacity at entry points
• unnecessary turbulence and shockwave propagation upstream the meso component of hybrid
models.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

Vehicle loading in existing microscopic models
Although, details regarding the loading mechanism in existing micro simulation models are sketchy
we present the default loading method used in two state of the art models, MITSIMLab (Yang,
Koutsopoulos, and Ben-Akiva, 2000), and VISSIM (PTV, 2005).
MITSIMLab. The vehicle loading in MITSIMLab consists of lane selection and speed assignment
componets. The lane selection depends on lane permissions (e.g. bus lanes), the continued path of the
vehicle (so that it will not have to immediately change lane to continue its path) and available space on
lanes. Of the ‘acceptable lanes’ the lane with the most space is selected. The speed of the loaded
vehicle is set based on the vehicle’s desired speed, the average segment speed and the entry queue
length (see Figure 1). If the entry queue is 0 (no vehicles waiting to enter) the vehicle is loaded with its
desired speed. When the entry queue grows (due to vehicles not being able to enter at the rate they
arrive) the vehicle is loaded at a speed approaching the segment speed. The problem that this method
may cause is that in congested situations, vehicles may be loaded at much higher speeds than the
vehicles in front, causing immediate deceleration. This is expected to cause turbulence and
shockwaves, and result in a reduced capacity for entry links.
Desired
speed
Segment
speed
Entry queue length
Figure 1. Vehicle loading speed in MITSIMLab
VISSIM. As in MITSIMLab, the lane selection in VISSIM depends on lane permissions and the
available space headway, where the acceptable lane with the largest space headway is selected. The
speed of the loaded vehicle in VISSIM is a function of the vehicle’s desired speed, the speed of the
vehicle in front (on the selected lane) and the space headway to the vehicle in front. If the front vehicle
is beyond the look-ahead distance of the vehicle to be loaded, the speed of the loaded vehicle will be
its desired speed. If the distance to the vehicle in front is 0, in theory the vehicle would be loaded with
the same speed as the vehicle in front (provided that the vehicle in front has a lower speed than the
loaded vehicle’s desired speed). However, the vehicle to be loaded will not be able to enter the
network if the space headway is smaller than a predefined safe distance. So in practice the vehicle will
usually be loaded at a speed somewhat higher than that of the front vehicle. While this method will
prevent extreme decelerations at the entry, it will still induce slight shockwaves due to the fact that in
saturated conditions, most entering vehicles will have a speed that is somewhat higher than the speed
of the vehicle in front and therefore always decelerate upon entry (see Figure 2).
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

Speed
Desired Speed
Front vehicle’s
speed
Safe distance Look-ahead Space headway
Figure 2. Vehicle loading speed in VISSIM
Proposed loading method
We propose a new loading method that aims at loading vehicles in a way that is more consistent with
their behavior when they enter the network. In microscopic simulation models the car-following is
one of the main models used to move vehicles in the network. Typical car-following models relate the
acceleration of a vehicle to the behavior of the surrounding vehicles, especially the speed of, and the
distance to the leading vehicle. The proposed method assigns speed to the vehicles entering the
network (either loaded at the origin, or transferred from the mesoscopic part of the network) using a
multi-regime approach based on the time headway between the entering vehicle and its leading vehicle
(in the same lane):
• Regime 1 (bounded traffic): t < t ≤ t seconds
1 h 2
o V = V
front
• Regime 2 (partially bounded traffic): t < t ≤ t seconds
2 h 3
o a = ( t - t )/(t - t )
h 2 3 2
o V = a *V + (1-a )*V
desired front
• Regime 3 (unbounded traffic): t > t seconds
h 3
o V = V
desired
where,
V: assigned initial speed,
V : speed of the vehicle in front (in the same lane),
front
V : vehicle’s desired speed,
desired
t : time headway to the vehicle in front (in the same lane).
h
a : parameter (0,1] that interpolates between the desired speed and the speed of the leading
vehicle. If V > V , V=V .
front desired desired
t : time headway thresholds, determined/calibrated from field data, i ∈ {1, 2, 3}.
i,
The time headway from the leading vehicle is defined as the time that has passed since the vehicle in
front was at the loading point, assuming it had its current speed. This means that in case of queue
build up and propagation towards the entry point, the vehicle in front is likely to have decelerated
since entering, and therefore the time headway may be slightly overestimated.
The above loading mechanism is supported by empirical data. On the E4 motorway (Essingeleden) in
Stockholm, individual speed and time headway data was collected (by the Swedish National Road
Administration) using high fidelity microwave detectors, using one detector for each lane. During the
measurement period the flows varied between 800 and 1700 veh/h/lane.
The measured speed and time headway data was grouped into time headway classes of 1 second each,
i.e. one class for vehicles arriving with time headways of 0 – 1 seconds, one class for 1 – 2 seconds
etc. Figure 3 illustrates the correlation coefficient between speeds of consecutive vehicles as a
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

function of their time headway. A clear trend can be observed from the data, with very high
correlation for the vehicles following at close time headways (classes 0 – 1, 1 – 2, and 2 – 3 seconds).
As expected, for the 3 – 4, 4 – 5 and 5 – 6 second time headway classes the correlation coefficients
decrease. It should be noted that the sample size of the classes for longer time headways is much
smaller than for the classes for short headways.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Timeheadway (s)
Figure 3. Consecutive vehicle speed correlation
Figure 4 compares the actual speeds of two consecutive vehicles in the two extreme classes 1 – 2
seconds and 7 – 8. The scatter plots clearly show the high correlation in the 1 – 2 second group,
compared to the correlation in the 7 – 8 second group.
a) 1 – 2 second group b) 7 – 8 second group
Figure 4. Scatter plots of consecutive vehicle speeds
Based on the above data, the following default headway thresholds for the proposed loading method
have been estimated:
• t = 0.5 seconds (minimum headway parameter)
1
• t = 2.5 seconds
2
• t = 7.5 seconds
3
8
noitalerroC

===== PAGE 9 =====

5. Case study
We demonstrate the importance of loading using two state-of-the-art microscopic traffic simulation
models, MITSIMLab (Yang, Koutsopoulos, et al., 2000) and VISSIM (PTV 2005). The impact on the
performance of a hybrid model is also demonstrated using the hybrid model MiMe (Burghout, 2004)
that combines MITSIMLab and the mesoscopic model MEZZO (Burghout 2004).
A small, linear network is used to demonstrate the impact of the loading mechanism. The network in
Figure 5 is used to evaluate the performance of each simulation model (MITSIMLab and VISSIM).
Figure 5. Test network for MITSIMLab and VISSIM alone
The network is loaded with a time dependent demand that increases slowly from t = 0 – 1800 sec and
creates relatively high flows from t = 1800 – 2400 sec, after which it decreases gradually (Figure 6).
Figure 6. Demand profile
The importance of the loading method is best illustrated by the distribution of speeds at sensor
locations 0 (at the entry) and 1 (500 m downstream). Figure 7 shows the speed at these locations for
MITIMSLab (7a) and VISSIM (7b) when the default loading mechanism is used.
Speed MITSIMlab
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
Time (s)
9
)hpm(
deepS
Speed MITSIMlab
70
60
50
40
30
20 Sensor 1: after 500m
10 Sensor 0: at entry
0
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
Time (s)
)hpm(
deepS
Speeds Vissim
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30 Sensor 1: after 500m
20
Sensor 0: at entry
10
0
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
time (s)
)h/mk(
deeps
Speeds Vissim
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
Sensor 0: At entry
10
Sensor 1: after 500m
0
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
time (s)
)h/mk(
deeps
Demand
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
Time (sec)
Sensor 0: At entry
Sensor 1: after 500m
a) MITSIMLab b) VISSIM
Figure 7. Impact of default loading mechanism
The loading in MITSIMLab clearly indicates a number of problems, especially since the vehicles enter
the network at rather high speeds. Although the speeds in VISSIM appear more consistent between
the sensors, problems still exist with respect to the loading of vehicles in VISSIM as well. Figure 8
shows the minimum acceleration (i.e. max deceleration in absolute value) of the vehicles entering the
)h/hev(
wolF
1 km, 2 lanes, 90 km/h
Sensor 0 Sensor 1 (500m)

===== PAGE 10 =====

network in VISSIM. Ideally, the minimum accelerations over sensors 0 (at entry) and sensor 1 (after
500m) should be similar. However, Figure 8 illustrates that the minimum accelerations over sensor 0
are much greater than those over sensor 1, indicating that some friction is caused by the vehicle
loading. This has implications on the number of vehicles the simulator is able to load on the network
(capacity at entry points). During the peak demand period (1800 – 2400 sec) 18 vehicles were not
able to enter the network.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
-9
time (s)
10
)2s/m(
cca
Sensor 0: At entry
Sensor 1: after 500m
Figure 8. Minimum acceleration of vehicles in VISSIM.
The proposed loading mechanism was implemented in MITSIMLab. Figure 9a shows the speeds of
the vehicles over sensors 0 and 1 with the new loading mechanism. Figure 9b shows the corresponding
average accelerations, during the first 20 sec after vehicles enter the network (at 0.1 sec intervals), and
compares them to the acceleration of the vehicles with the original loading method.
a) speeds b) average acceleration
Figure 9. MITSIMLab: Impact of proposed loading
As discussed before, the original loading method in MITSIMLab generates initial speeds (sensor 0)
that are too high for the time headway and the traffic conditions immediately downstream (see Figure
7a), causing large decelerations of the entering vehicles (see Figure 9b) Because of the resulting
turbulence, the capacity of the entry is underestimated. In contrast, the proposed loading method
shows a much better behavior. The average speeds at the link entry are comparable to those in the
interior of the link (Figure 9a), causing little deceleration upon entry (Figure 9b). Flows are no longer
artificially disrupted by the decelerations of entering vehicles (Figure 9b).
In addition, the impact of the loading mechanism is assessed using the hybrid simulation model MiMe
in the same network. The mesoscopic (MEZZO) and microscopic (MITSIMLab) areas of the network
are shown in Figure 10. MiMe was used to simulate the operations of the network first with the
default MITSIMLab loading mechanism and then with the proposed method.

===== PAGE 11 =====

Figure 10. Test network for hybrid model MiMe
The results show that the original loading method causes disturbances that result in high accelerations
(Figure 11). The behavior is similar to the behavior observed with MITSIMLab alone, although the
impact seems to be greater in the hybrid model (compare Figures 9b and 11).
Figure 11. Entry acceleration pattern with original and proposed loading method in MiMe.
The flows, under the default loading method, are very unstable (Figure 12a). The decelerations cause
heavy disruptions of the flows, due to the shockwaves that propagate backward into the mesoscopic
network. The proposed loading method generates more realistic accelerations during the first 20 sec
(Figure 11) and, as a result, a much better flow profile as flows are no longer artificially disrupted by
the decelerations of entering vehicles (Figure 12b).
a) Original loading method. b) Proposed loading method.
Figure 12. Flows in hybrid model MiMe
6. Conclusion
The paper discussed issues related to the integration of mesoscopic/microscopic traffic simulation
models. Such hybrid models have a number of advantages over standard microscopic models,
especially in large scale applications with extensive data input and calibration requirements.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

Successful hybrid models require, among other things, consistent representation of traffic dynamics at
the boundaries between the meso and micro networks. A critical determinant of this consistency is the
loading mechanism that transfers vehicles form the meso to the micro network. The loading
mechanism is important for hybrid models as well as stand alone micro models.
The paper presented an integrated framework for the development of hybrid models. In addition, the
role of the vehicle loading mechanism on the validity of hybrid models (and microscopic models on
their own) was also examined. A new loading method was proposed which, compared to existing
approaches, resulted in a much more consistent performance. The results from a case study supported
both the importance of the loading mechanism and the value of the proposed method. Inappropriate
loading methods can result in excessive decelerations and accelerations, volatility and delayed vehicle
entry, reduced capacity at entry points, and unnecessary turbulence and shockwave propagation.
References
M. Yang, Q., H.N. Koutsopoulos, and M. Ben-Akiva (2000), “A Simulation Laboratory for Evaluating
Dynamic Traffic Management Systems” Transportation Research Record, No. 1710, pp 122-130,
E. Bourrel and J.-B. Lesort (2003). Mixing Micro and Macro Representations of Traffic Flow: a
Hybrid Model Based on the LWR Theory. Transportation Research Board, Washington DC.
W. Burghout (2004). Hybrid Microscopic-Mesoscopic Traffic Simulation. Dept of Infrastructure.
Stockholm, Royal Institute of Technology: 210.
http://www.infra.kth.se/ctr/publikationer/ctr2004_04.pdf
W. Burghout, H. Koutsopoulos and I. Andreasson (2005). Hybrid mesoscopic-microscopic traffic
simulation. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board. No. 1934,
pp 218-225.
S. Espie, D. Gattuso and F. Galante (2006). A Hybrid Traffic Model Coupling Macro and Behavioural
Micro Simulation. 85th Meeting of Transportation Research Board CD-ROM, Washington DC.
L. Magne, S. Rabut and J.-F. Gabard (2000). Towards an hybrid macro-micro traffic simulation
model. INFORMS, Salt Lake City, USA.
S. Mammar, J.-P. Lebaque and H. Haj-Salem (2006). A Hybrid Model Based on a Second Order
Traffic Model. 85th Meeting of Transportation Research Board CD-ROM, Washington DC.
A. Poschinger, R. Kates and J. Meier (2000). The flow of data in coupled microscopic and
macroscopic traffic simulation models. World Congress on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Torino.
PTV (2005). VISSIM User's Manual 4.1. Karlsruhe, PTV AG.
H. Shi and A. Ziliaskopoulos (2006). A Hybrid Mesoscopic-Microscopic Traffic Simulation model:
Design, Implementation and Compuatational Analysis. 85th Meeting of Transportation Research
Board, CD-ROM.
Q. Yang and D. Morgan (2006). A Hybrid Traffic Simulation Model. 85th Meeting of the
Transportation Research Board CD-ROM, Washington DC.
12
