===== PAGE 1 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 1
Hybrid Mesoscopic-Microscopic Traffic Simulation
Wilco Burghout*1, Haris N. Koutsopoulos2, Ingmar Andréasson1
1 Centre for traffic simulation (CTR), Royal Institute of Technology, SE-10044 Stockholm, Sweden.
{wilco|ingmar}@infra.kth.se
2Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University
437 Snell Engineering Center, Boston, MA 02115-5000, haris@coe.neu.edu
* Corresponding author: wilco@infra.kth.se
Submitted for publication in Transportation Research Record, March 2005
6092 words (Abstract+Text+References) + 1 table and 4 figures (5 X 250) = 7342 words

===== PAGE 2 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 2
Hybrid Mesoscopic-Microscopic Traffic Simulation
Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson
Abstract
Traffic simulation is an important tool for modeling the operations of dynamic traffic systems. While microscopic
simulation models provide a detailed representation of the traffic process, macroscopic and mesoscopic models
capture traffic dynamics of large networks, in lesser detail, but without the problems of application and calibration
of microscopic models. In this paper we present a hybrid mesoscopic-microscopic model that applies microscopic
simulation to areas of specific interest, while simulating a large surrounding network in lesser detail with a
mesoscopic model. We identify requirements that are important in order for a hybrid model to be consistent across
the models at different levels of detail. These requirements vary from network and route-choice consistency to
consistency of traffic dynamics at the boundaries of the micro and meso submodels. We propose an integration
framework that satisfies these requirements. A prototype hybrid model is used to demonstrate the application of the
integration framework and the solution of the various integration issues. The hybrid model integrates MITSIMLab,
a microscopic traffic simulation model, and Mezzo, a newly developed mesoscopic model. The hybrid model is
applied in two case studies. The results are very promising and support both the proposed architecture and the
importance of integrating micro and meso models.
Keywords: Traffic simulation, Traffic models, Mesoscopic, Microscopic, Hybrid

===== PAGE 3 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 3
1. INTRODUCTION
Traffic simulation has become very popular for modeling the operations of dynamic traffic systems. Traffic
simulation models are macroscopic, mesoscopic or microscopic. Macroscopic (macro) models (e.g. Strada (1),
Metacor (2)) tend to model traffic as a continuous flow, often using formulations based on hydrodynamic flow
theories. Mesoscopic (meso) models (e.g. DynaMIT (3), DYNASMART (4)) model individual vehicles, but at an
aggregate level, usually by speed-density relationships and queuing theory approaches. Microscopic (micro) models
(e.g. MITSIMLab (5), Vissim (6)) capture the behavior of vehicles and drivers in great detail, including interactions
among vehicles, lane changing, response to incidents, and behavior at merging points. Because of this level of detail
in the representation of traffic dynamics, microscopic models are appropriate for evaluation of ITS systems at the
operational level, since the representation of many dynamic traffic management systems requires such fine-grained
modeling of the traffic process.
However, the application of micro simulation is not without problems. Due to the detailed nature of the
models, the preparation of input data (e.g. network coding and representation) can be very time consuming and
tedious. In addition, micro models are highly sensitive to errors or variation in input demand data, especially under
congested conditions. Finally, and due to the complicated structure of the models involved, calibration is not trivial.
Furthermore, for these reasons and due to their complexity, microscopic models are usually applied to smaller
networks and may suffer from boundary effects. On the other hand, macro and meso models usually have fewer
parameters to calibrate and are less sensitive to errors in network coding or demand variations. However, due to
their more aggregate nature, such models are limited in their ability to capture the detailed behavior needed to study
traffic networks with dynamic traffic management capabilities.
The objective of the paper is to present a methodology for the systematic integration of meso and micro
simulation models into a single hybrid model. Such a hybrid model has the advantages of both types of simulation
since it combines high fidelity micro simulation in areas of particular interest, with meso simulation of a large
surrounding area. Another advantage of the integration is that it reduces the computational requirements. Overall,
integration enables the simulation of large scale networks, incorporating the effects of local micro phenomena, with
increased accuracy and validity, while reducing the required data collection and calibration effort of the overall
model.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 identifies the main requirements for a
successful hybrid simulation model. Section 3 introduces the integration framework and proposes solutions for the
various issues and requirements identified in section 2. Section 4 presents results from two case studies that
illustrate the consistency issues and the importance of integration. Finally, Section 5 draws conclusions and
summarizes the paper.
2. MESO-MICRO INTEGRATION REQUIREMENTS
An important aspect in developing a hybrid meso-micro traffic simulation model is the identification and
implementation of conditions for consistent interfaces between the meso and micro simulation components of the
simulation model. These conditions range from structural compatibility issues in terms of modeling traffic flows in
the two models, to compatibility of route choice.
Previous studies of dynamic hybrid models include Micmac (7), Hystra (8), (9), and Micro-Macro link
(10). These models combine dynamic macro with micro simulation. They focus on compatibility issues that arise
from combining two models that represent traffic flow at two different resolutions. The macro models represent
traffic as continuous flows, while the micro models represent individual vehicles. The proposed approaches vary in
how they address the problem of converting continuous flows into individual vehicles and vice-versa at the macro-
micro boundaries. In (7) the micro model is adapted to fit a number of conditions regarding the fundamental
diagrams, produced by the macro model, while in (8), (9) first a micro model is derived from the LWR theory (11)
(12), in order to fit the macro model which is also based on the LWR theory. This model showed good equivalence,
but was difficult to extend. The second model presented in (8), (9) is based on Newell’s optimum velocity model
(13). In (10) the micro model (IDM) and macro model (GFT) are derived from gas-kinetic type differential
equations.
However, restricting the micro model to fit the macro model, or deriving the micro model from macro
equations, may limit the capability of the model since the micro-macro equivalence usually only holds during steady
state flows. Since only the car-following model is derived or adapted to fit the macro model, important aspects such
as lane-changing are not part of the equivalence, and neither is gap-acceptance and stochasticity of user behavior. It
is not clear how these aspects can be introduced (although (9) shows how stochastic desired speeds can be
introduced) while maintaining equivalency, and in (7),(8) and (9) the use of ‘transition cells’ is reported to be

===== PAGE 4 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 4
necessary. Furthermore, the approach may constrain the type of car following models that can be used, as the range
of multi-regime models such as MITSIMLab (5), Aimsun (14) and Paramics (15), as well as psycho-physical
models such as Vissim (6) cannot be derived from macro models, nor can their steady state properties be
theoretically derived.
The approach proposed here for the development of a hybrid model focuses on the integration of meso with
micro models. Since meso models represent flow as individual vehicles, earlier problems of
aggregating/disaggregating the flow are easier to deal with. The main requirements for the development of a
micro/meso hybrid traffic simulation model include:
Consistency in route choice and network representation
One of the most basic conditions is general consistency of the two models in their representation of the road
network, paths, and route choice. The route choice needs to be consistent to ensure that vehicles will make the same
decision given the same route choice situation (pre-trip or en-route), regardless if they are in the micro or the meso
model. This means also that the representation of the alternative paths needs to be consistent throughout the hybrid
model, as well as the travel times (link costs).
Consistency of traffic dynamics at meso-micro boundaries
Besides the consistency of network representation, the consistency of traffic dynamics at the boundaries between the
meso and micro submodels needs to be ensured. This means that traffic dynamics upstream and downstream of the
boundaries need to be consistent. For instance, when a queue is forming downstream of the boundary point, and
grows until it reaches the boundary, it should continue in the other submodel, upstream of the boundary, in a similar
way as it would if the boundary had not been there.
Consistency in traffic performance for meso and micro submodels
The two submodels need to be consistent with each other with regard to the results they produce. Ideally, for those
facilities that can be simulated sufficiently well by both models, the results, in terms of common outputs, such as
travel times, flows, speeds, densities, etc, should be similar. This implies the need for consistent calibration of the
two models.
Transparent communication and data exchanges
The submodels exchange large amounts of data conveying vehicle characteristics, and downstream traffic
conditions. This requires an efficient synchronization and communication paradigm, and a design that minimizes the
amount and frequency of data exchange. Otherwise the communication overhead may become very large. On the
other hand, aggregation and disaggregation of information at the boundaries may introduce complications, and
should thus be avoided (see (7),(8), (9), (10)).
3. INTEGRATION FRAMEWORK
In this section we propose an implementation architecture that facilitates the consistency between the submodels and
discusses alternative modeling approaches to meet the requirements identified in Section 2.
3.1 Architecture
Simulation models are in general a synthesis of a number of supply and demand models. Meso and micro models
use different approaches to model traffic dynamics and different levels of aggregation for network representation.
However, since they both use an individual vehicle-based representation of flow, they usually employ similar travel
behavior models (e.g. route choice models). Hence, the route choice component should be shared by both models,
and operate on the complete network graph, including both the micro and meso areas. The paths should be defined
over this common network graph, and the link travel time database should cover the entire network, and also be
shared by both models.
The proposed architecture consists of a module, outside the meso and micro models, that contains the
common elements: a database with the network graph, the travel time tables, the set of paths and the origin-

===== PAGE 5 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 5
destination (OD) flows, as well as a travel behavior component with route choice models and path generation
algorithms.
<insert figure 1 here>
Figure 1a presents the proposed integration architecture. The travel behavior component in the common
module uses the database that contains the complete network graph, link travel times and known paths for the entire
network. Both the micro and meso models supply descriptions of their subnetworks, from which the network graph
is constructed. Each time a vehicle makes a route choice (whether in micro or meso), the common module is
consulted. For the common route choice module to operate properly, the meso and micro models need to update the
travel time database regularly with the link travel times in their subnetwork.
The common module also includes the OD matrix for the entire network. To simplify the information
exchange and facilitate a transparent data input interface, it is assumed that all origin and destination nodes in the
network belong to the meso subnetwork. This assumption is by no means restrictive, since an origin or destination
node in the micro area can always be designated as a boundary node in meso connected directly to the micro
subnetwork.
The above architecture is applicable in the case where the two simulation models to be integrated have an
open architecture or are new models, developed with integration in mind. In integrating existing models, that are not
as flexible, the implementation of the integration framework needs to be adjusted to minimize inter-model
communication, and use functionalities that are implemented separately in each model in a consistent way. For
example, the simulation models may have their own route choice models. In this case, consistent route choice
behavior across submodels requires two conditions: a) route choice models with the same structure and parameters
in the two submodels, and b) consistent path choice set (defined over the entire network). To maintain the required
consistency in this case, the micro and meso networks are enhanced with the addition of virtual links that correspond
to the paths in the remaining network.
More specifically the meso network includes virtual links for each path connecting boundary nodes in the
micro network. This representation guarantees that each relevant path through the micro model is represented
correctly in the meso route choice. The meso model collects travel times for the virtual links, and uses them in the
route choice like any other link in the network. Similarly the micro network is expanded with the addition of micro
virtual links to the micro subnetwork. The virtual links allow the micro model to deal with en-route choice in the
micro subnetwork. Since each path from an exit point in the micro network to a destination in the meso network is
represented by a virtual link in the micro model, a change of route for a vehicle in the micro sub-network can
effectively mean a different exit point into the meso network. There are no limitations in the framework regarding
the number of virtual links, nor the recalculation of the virtual links due to changing traffic conditions.
The above considerations simplify the initial architecture considerably in the case where integration of
existing simulation models takes place (Figure 1b). Under this architecture, and based on the OD matrix
representation discussed earlier, the meso model is solely responsible for all pre-trip decisions, while en-route
decisions are the responsibility of the respective subnetwork and paths inside the meso model. This architecture has
a number of practical advantages compared to the initial one. While the initial architecture would be preferable in
the case of a new meso-micro model, it would require large amounts of communication overhead when combining
two existing models. With the above modifications this overhead is avoided.
3.2 Modeling for Consistency
Assuming a common network graph, the architecture proposed in section 3.1 ensures route choice consistency.
However, several aspects still need to be addressed at the modeling level, especially at the interface between the
micro and meso areas.
Network representation
Problems may occur if the level of detail in micro and meso subnetworks is not consistent. Networks for micro
simulation include (almost) all roads in the area of study. On the other hand, meso networks are much larger and
may include only a subset of the roads. When these networks are combined into a general network there are two
problems: a) connectivity, and b) capacity at the interfaces.
The connectivity problem arises when not all links in one model (micro) are present in the other (meso) at
the boundary of the two models (this may also affect the correct definition of paths over the entire network). For the
same reason, the micro capacity at the boundary interface may be different than the meso capacity. This can lead to

===== PAGE 6 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 6
very biased results unless the level of network aggregation across the boundaries is both consistent and appropriate.
Of course, an easy and practical solution to this problem may be to increase the level of detail in the meso
subnetwork where it connects to the micro subnetwork, and maybe decrease the level of detail in the micro
subnetwork, near the boundaries with the meso one.
Modeling traffic dynamics at meso-micro boundaries
The limited literature on hybrid simulation models focuses on aggregation/disaggregation issues between the macro
and micro representations of traffic (see (7),(8), (10), (16)). In our case these issues are avoided by integrating two
models that have a vehicle-based representation of traffic flows. However, other issues concerning the interfaces
between the models remain. In principle, the main sources of potential inconsistencies at the interface between the
meso and micro models are:
• Location of boundaries
• Queue formation and representation
• Vehicle attributes (i.e. determination of speeds and accelerations of vehicles crossing the micro/meso
boundaries)
Location of boundaries. Due to the fact that the meso and micro submodels may represent links and intersections
differently, the positioning of the boundaries between them should be carefully considered. Placing them at nodes in
the overall network would imply that some of the legs of an intersection would be at meso and some at micro level.
This creates the problem of having to deal with the intersection behavior (signal controlled or otherwise) at different
levels of detail. For instance, gap acceptance models in the micro module require vehicles’ positions, speeds and
gaps in the opposing flows. This information though, is not typically available at the mesoscopic level. It is
recommended therefore, that the boundaries be located in the middle of links, with exactly one entry and one exit
segment.
Queue formation and representation. The placement of boundaries is also dependent on the homogeneity of
traffic conditions. Typically micro models, due to their level of detail, represent lane-specific queues. Meso models
on the other hand, usually do not have lanes. If this is the case, a queue on one lane in micro, even if the other lanes
remain open, will block the boundary node completely, unless the exchange of vehicles at the boundary is taking
place properly. The virtual links in the meso subnetwork play an important role in solving the problem of
inconsistent queue representation. Virtual links that represent paths that can only use the blocked lanes will be
blocked, while virtual links representing paths that use open lanes will have available capacity and allow the proper
advancement of the corresponding vehicles.
Crossing vehicle attributes. The attributes of the vehicles as they cross the boundaries need to be properly
determined in both directions (micro (cid:1) meso) and (meso (cid:1) micro). Attributes such as speeds, accelerations,
headways, etc should be consistent with the prevailing conditions in the new segment the vehicle is moving to,
otherwise unnecessary shockwaves may propagate upstream.
On the boundary from the meso to the micro (meso (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) micro) submodel information is exchanged in both
directions: from meso to micro information about vehicles (with a certain speed and at certain time intervals) needs
to be communicated; from micro to meso information about blocking of boundaries and downstream density needs
to be communicated. If the entry to the micro link (downstream of the boundary point) is blocked, the meso needs to
stop vehicles from exiting. The micro model informs meso when the blockage is removed, so that vehicles can start
flowing (over that specific boundary) again. The micro also sends the density in the vicinity of the boundary to
meso, where it is used to calculate the speed of the shockwave that propagates upstream.
A more complicated issue is the generation of information that is needed in the micro representation of
traffic, but missing in the meso. The micro characteristics that need to be generated at the entry to the micro model
are divided into vehicle/driver attributes and model variables. Attributes such as desired speed are generated
independently in micro based on the distribution of these characteristics in the general driver population assumed by
the micro model. Model variables, such as the vehicle’s speed, acceleration and time headway to the vehicle in front
need to be in accordance with the traffic situation upstream and downstream of the boundary.
The variables that need to be assigned values at the entry of a vehicle from the meso into the micro models are
usually: lane, time-headway to the vehicle in front, speed and acceleration. From the meso model the time-headway
is determined, but not the speed, acceleration or lane. Based on the type of vehicle and the vehicle’s path, a set of

===== PAGE 7 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 7
feasible lanes is specified. The vehicle is loaded on the lane with the largest available headway (space). The speed
assigned to the vehicle according to the following algorithm:
• Regime 1 (bound traffic): t < t <= t
1 h 2
V = V
front
• Regime 2 (partially bound traffic): t < t <= t
2 h 3
a = ( t - t )/( t -t )
h 2 3 2
V = a *V + (1-a )*V
desired front
• Regime 3 (unbound traffic): t > t
h 3
V = V
desired
Where,
t = threshold, to be calibrated
i
t = time headway (s)
h
V = speed (km/h)
V = speed of vehicle in front (km/h)
front
V = desired speed (km/h)
desired
The above approach was tested with actual data in (17). Measurements of speeds and time-headways on an urban
freeway in Stockholm show high correlation of speeds between consecutive vehicles on the same lane, in the case of
small headways (t = 0.5 seconds, t = 2.5 seconds). This correlation decreases with increased time headways, and
1 2
remains at a constant low level beyond t = 7.5 seconds. In almost all micro models, an initial acceleration rate of 0
3
m/s2 is assigned to the vehicles that enter the network. The assignment of zero acceleration to the vehicles crossing
the micro boundary suffices for the hybrid model as well.
In the interface from the micro to the meso model (micro (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) meso), similar conditions need to be met as
mentioned in the meso to micro case. In the first instance the meso needs to inform the micro each time the
downstream meso link becomes blocked or unblocked, so that the micro model can stop/start sending vehicles at the
right moments. In addition to the blocking, the vehicles in micro that move towards the exit to meso, need to react to
the downstream traffic conditions, as they would if the downstream link were micro as well. In that case, the
vehicles would react to vehicles in front, using their car-following logic, and those vehicles would react to vehicles
in front of them, etc. In the meso model, however, the position and detailed behavior of vehicles is not usually
modeled. But it is known when the latest arrival of a vehicle was, and the (average) speed it was assigned. Using this
information a virtual vehicle is projected in the “imaginary” continuation of the micro link, and vehicles in micro
that are near the exit react to the virtual vehicle, as if it were a normal vehicle in front of them. This idea can also be
found (in a slightly different form) in (8) and (7). An obvious refinement is to use lane-specific virtual vehicles.
3.3 Communication/Synchronization
The meso and micro models need to communicate with each other to hand over vehicles that cross the boundaries,
and inform each other of traffic conditions downstream of the boundaries, so that traffic upstream can react to these.
Hence, in order to facilitate the proper modeling of the traffic dynamics at the interfaces, as outlined above, the
following information is exchanged between the submodels:
1. vehicles passing the boundaries between the models and their characteristics
2. link blocking/unblocking information
3. density on micro segments
4. information for virtual vehicles (speed and entry time of vehicle that last crossed the border)
4. CASE STUDIES
Two case studies are used to illustrate the points made in this paper. The consistency issues and their resolutions are
discussed through a case study with a small artificial network. The importance of integration in the quality of the
results is illustrated in a second case study using an actual network from Stockholm. The hybrid model used in the
case studies was developed using two simulation models: MITSIMLab and Mezzo.
MITSIMLab is a high fidelity micro model, which has been applied in a number of studies, and has been
calibrated and validated in both USA and Sweden (18, 19). Mezzo is a new event-based mesoscopic model that was
developed in the context of this research (20). A network in Mezzo consists of nodes and links. The links are

===== PAGE 8 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 8
characterized by the number of lanes and length. Each link has a speed/density function associated with it, that
determines the traversal speed of vehicles entering the link, given the density at the time of entry. At the nodes, one
stochastic queue-server for each turning movement regulates the transfer of vehicles from one link to another. The
queue at the downstream end of the link consists of vehicles that are ready to exit (given their entry time and
traversal speed), and occupies space. The density on the part of the link not occupied by the queue (running part) is
used in the calculation of the traversal speeds. Queues blocking upstream of a turning movement can block access
to other turning movements, if they grow beyond a predetermined length.
The propagation of queue-fronts is modeled based on the shockwave theory (11), (12). The shockwave
speed of the queue front is calculated for cases in which a queue dissipates in the downstream segment. When the
dissipation reaches the current segment, the flow and density in the downstream segment and current segment are
used to calculate the propagation speed of the start-up shockwave. In addition, the downstream density is used to
determine the speed of the vehicles once they start moving towards the stopline. Using these two speeds, the delay to
each vehicle is calculated.
The two submodels communicate via PVM (21), which makes it possible to run Mezzo and MITSIMLab
on different computers. Since Mezzo is event-based, and has thus a continuous representation of time, the message
passing is also used for synchronizing with the micro time-steps. A message with the relevant information for
Mezzo is sent at each MITSIMLab time-step, and upon receipt, Mezzo sends back a message with the relevant
information for MITSIMLab. These messages from MITSIMLab are therefore treated as external events, and are
processed just like any other event.
4.1 Case Study I
We will illustrate the behavior of the hybrid model using a simple network operating under incident conditions. In
the first case the incident takes place in the micro part of the network and in the second in the mezzo part. We focus
our discussion, specifically on the way queue build-up and dissipation propagates across the boundary, both in the
meso-to-micro and micro-to-meso direction.
The network consists of a single two-lane road that is 5 km long, divided into 10 segments of 500 meter
(Figure 2). The first five segments are within Mezzo, followed by two segments in MITSIMLab, and finally three
Mezzo segments.
<insert figure 2 here>
The free flow speed is 100 km/h. A constant demand of 3000 veh/h is applied for a simulation time of 1 hour (3600
seconds). The locations of the incidents are indicated in Figure 2. The first scenario has the incident on the
boundary between segments 5 and 6 in MITSIMLab, and the second on the boundary between segments 8 and 9 in
Mezzo. The incidents occur 20 minutes into the simulation and completely block the link for 5 minutes. Mezzo was
calibrated using data obtained from MITSIMLab, run independently on the same network, under a variety of
demand loads. The parameters in Mezzo that require calibration include the capacity of the servers at the nodes and
the parameters of the speed-density relationship used to determine the speed of the vehicles. (22).
<insert figure 3 here>
Figure 3a shows the cumulative outflow (veh/lane) for segments 0 to 5 under the first scenario. The cumulative flow
shows that the propagation of changes in flow in both queue build-up and queue-dissipation is smooth and consistent
across the meso-to-micro and micro-to-meso boundaries. As the queue grows it starts blocking upstream segments
as shockwaves start traveling upstream. Figure 3b illustrates the evolution of density over time in the five segments
of interest. The density increases in segment 5 (MITSIMLab) after the incident takes place. The queue reaches the
boundary with the mezzo segment 4 approximately when the incident is cleared, causing the queue on segment 5 to
dissipate. However, the end of the queue still exists and that causes the density in segment 4 to remain high for some
time, also causing upstream segments to get blocked. As in the cumulative flow plot, it can be observed that queue
formation and dissipation behave properly over the boundaries. There are some differences between the Mitsim and
Mezzo segments. The queue dissipation shockwave propagates faster in Mezzo than in Mitsim. This is possibly
due to the simplified representation of acceleration and driver reaction delay time in Mezzo.
It can also be noted that when the queue front reaches the queue back on the last congested segment
(segment 1), it causes an increase in the density in segment 2. This may be a result of the simplified traffic dynamics
representation in the Mezzo model, which does not take into account the vehicles that approach the end of the queue

===== PAGE 9 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 9
but never come to a complete stop. Because of this simplification, the outflow of this segment is larger, resulting in
a second ‘bump’ in the density of the downstream segment. In general, the results indicate that the queue
propagation and dissipation behavior is consistent across the Mezzo-MITSIMLab boundary.
In the second scenario a similar type incident is introduced at the exit of segment 8 in Mezzo. In this
scenario queue behavior similar to scenario 1 (Figure 3) occurs. One difference that was observed is the steep
increase of the outflow from (Mezzo) segment 8 at the end of the incident, whereas the increase in flow on
(MITSIMLab) segment 5 is smoother and slower. This can be explained by the fact that the shockwave theory which
is used for modeling the queue dissipation in Mezzo, assumes immediate changes in speed, while the vehicles in
MITSIMLab are bound to their acceleration limits (and reaction times). Another reason may be the quality of the
calibration of the Mezzo speed/density function.
4.2 Case Study II
The objective of the second case study is to compare the accuracy of the results of the hybrid model against actual
measurements (for more details about this case study see (22)). The hybrid model (MiMe) is used to simulate the
operations on a mixed freeway/urban network in the north of Stockholm (Brunnsviken). MITSIMLab has been
calibrated and validated independently for the same network (see (18)).
<insert figure 4 here>
The network (Figure 4) is divided into the meso part in the north, which consists mainly of freeways, and micro part
in the south, which consists of a number of complex intersections with coordinated signal control and a large
roundabout. The area is highly congested during the studied period, which is the morning peak, 6:45 – 9:00 a.m.
Sensor count data from 12 locations across the network, averaged over 15 minute intervals, was available from May
2000. The OD matrix used for this case study was estimated in (18).
The performance of the hybrid model is compared against MITSIMLab and Mezzo using the RMSNE
(Root Mean Squared Normalized Error) relative to observed flow values and Theil inequality coefficient U( (23),
(24) ). The U error proportions UM, US, and UC are also used to measure the systematic (bias), variance, and non-
systematic (covariance) proportions of the errors. Table 1 summarizes the results. MITSIMLab corresponds to the
results of the application of MITSIMLab alone, Mezzo to the results of the application of Mezzo alone, and Hybrid
to the results of the application of the integrated model (MiMe).
<insert table 1 here>
The values indicate that, as expected, MITSIMLab performs best. According to the RMSNE values, the hybrid
model (MiMe) performed better than Mezzo alone, due to the fact that the signal controlled portion of the network is
now simulated at microscopic detail. The Theil U value indicates that the Mezzo model has a larger systematic error
than MiMe. To further explore the nature of the differences, Table 1 reports the RMSNE for sensors located in
different parts of the network (Meso network is the part of the network modeled by Meso in the hybrid model, and
Micro network is the part of the network modeled by MITSIMLab in the hybrid model). The part of the network
modeled by MITSIMLab in the hybrid model application is very congested and contains a number of complex
signalized intersections. The results clearly illustrate the importance of the more detailed representation. Not only
the accuracy of the simulation improves in the micro network but also in the meso network, presumably due to
better flow propagation.
Finally, as expected the computational time for MiMe is far superior compared to the computational time
required to model the network using MITSIMLab (about 5 times faster). This difference is expected to grow as the
size of the network increases.
5. CONCLUSION
Micro and meso traffic simulation models have different strengths and weaknesses. While micro models provide a
more detailed representation of the traffic process, meso models are able to capture traffic dynamics of large
networks, in lesser detail, but without the data requirements and other application problems of micro models. In this
paper we discussed the requirements for the development of a hybrid meso-micro model which applies micro
simulations to areas of specific interest, while simulating a large surrounding network in lesser detail with the meso
model.

===== PAGE 10 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 10
We proposed an integration framework that satisfies the integration requirements, and discussed a prototype hybrid
model which integrates MITSIMLab (micro) and a newly developed meso simulation model. In a small case study
aspects of consistency of traffic dynamics across boundaries of the individual models were demonstrated. The
importance of hybrid modeling for the quality of the results was illustrated in a second case study using an actual
network from Stockholm. The results indicate that by modeling specific parts of the network in microscopic detail,
the quality of the simulation results improve. In addition, the data preparation, calibration efforts, and computing
time are significantly reduced.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Professor Ben-Akiva, director of the ITS lab at MIT for making available the
MITSIMLab program source code, which has been used for creating the implementation of the hybrid model
presented in this paper.
REFERENCES
1. Buisson, C., J.-P. Lebaque, and J.-B. Lesort. A discretized macroscopic model of vehicular traffic flow in
complex networks based on the Godunov scheme. Presented at CESE'96. Lille, France, 1996.
2. Elloumi, N., H. Haj-Salem, and M. Papageorgiou. METACOR: A macroscopic Modelling Tool for Urban
Corridor. Presented at TRIennal Symposium on Transport ANalysis. Capri, 1994.
3. Ben-Akiva, M.E., et al., eds. Real-time simulation of traffic demand-supply interactions within DynaMIT.
Transportation and network analysis: current trends. Miscellenea in honor of Michael Florian, ed. M.
Gendreau and P. Marcotte, Kluwer Academic Publishers: Boston/Dordrecht/London. 19-36, 2002.
4. Jayakrishnan, R., H.S. Mahmassani, and T.Y. Hu, An Evaluation Tool fo Advanced Traffic Information and
Management Systems in Urban Networks. Transportation Research C: 2C(3): pp. 129-147, 1994.
5. Ben-Akiva, M., et al., Simulation Laboratory for Evaluating Dynamic Traffic Management Systems. ASCE
Journal of Transportation Engineering: 123(4), 1997.
6. Fellendorf, M. VISSIM for traffic signal optimisation. Presented at Traffic Technology International. Dorking,
UK, 1996.
7. Magne, L., S. Rabut, and J.-F. Gabard. Towards an hybrid macro-micro traffic simulation model. Presented at
INFORMS. Salt Lake City, USA, 2000.
8. Bourrel, E. and J.-B. Lesort. Mixing Micro and Macro Representations of Traffic Flow: a Hybrid Model Based
on the LWR Theory. Presented at Transportation Research Board. Washington DC, 2003.
9. Bourrel, E., Modélisation dynamique de l'ecoulement du traffic routier: du macroscopique au microscopique,
PhD thesis, L' Institut National des Sciences Appliquées de Lyon, Lyon, 2003,
10. Helbing, D., et al., Micro- and Macrosimulation of Freeway Traffic. Mathematical and Computer Modelling:
35(5/6): pp. 517-547, 2002.
11. Lighthill, M.H. and G.B. Whitham. On kinematic waves II: a theory of traffic flow on long crowded roads.
Presented at Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 1955.
12. Richards, P.I., Shockwaves on the Highway. Operations Research: 4: pp. 42-51, 1956.
13. Newell, G.F., Non linear effects in the dynamics of car-following. Operations Research: 9, 1961.
14. Barcelo, J., J. Ferrer, and R. Grau, Microscopic traffic simulation for ATT systems analysis, Universitat
Politecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, 1997
15. Smith, M., et al., Paramics Final Report, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 1994
16. Kates, R. and A. Poschinger. Investigation of a stochastic disaggregation model. Presented at World Congress
on Intelligent Transportation Systems. Torino, 2000.
17. Burghout, W., H. Koutsopoulos, and I. Andreasson, Loading of vehicles in microscopic simulation models.
International Journal of Transportation Management: Submitted for review, 2004.
18. Toledo, T., et al., Calibration and validation of microscopic traffic simulation tools: Stockholm Case Study.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board: (1831): pp. 65-75, 2003.
19. Yang, Q., A Simulation Laboratory for Evaluation of Dynamic Traffic Management Systems, PhD thesis, ITS
Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, (MA), 1997,
20. Burghout, W., Mezzo: an event-based mesoscopic simulation model for dynamic traffic assignment, CTR
working paper, Centre for Traffic Simulation, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2004

===== PAGE 11 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 11
21. Alexandrov, V. and J. Dongarra. Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface.
Presented at 5th European Pvm/Mpi User's Group Meeting. Liverpool, UK: Springer Verlag, 1998.
22. Burghout, W., Hybrid Microscopic-Mesoscopic Traffic Simulation Modelling, PhD thesis, Dept of
Infrastracture, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 2004,
http://www.infra.kth.se/ctr/publikationer/ctr2004_04.pdf
23. Pindyck, R. and D. Rubinfeld, Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 1997.
24. Theil, H., Economic forecasts and policy, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1961.

===== PAGE 12 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 12
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1 Results of Case Study II on all three models.
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1 Integration Architecture: (a) Generic architecture, (b) Simplified architecture
FIGURE 2 Test network
FIGURE 3 Results Incident scenario 1. (a) Cumulative flow, (b) Density over time
FIGURE 4 Application of Hybrid model (MiMe) on Brunnsviken / Stockholm network.

===== PAGE 13 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 13
TABLE 1 Results of Case Study II on all three models.
MITSIMLab Mezzo Hybrid (MiMe)
RMSNE
Entire network 12% 16% 15%
Meso network 10% 13% 11%
Micro network 14% 18% 17%
Theil U 0.051 0.055 0.054
UM 0.001 0.147 0.075
US 0.010 0.002 0.017
UC 0.989 0.852 0.909

===== PAGE 14 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 14
Vehicles,
Meso Traffic - Micro
Common Module
conditions
Network graph Subnetwork
Travel
Database
behavior Virtual links Virtual links
Network graph
Pre-trip Travel
Times
Travel times Link travel Link travel
En-Route times times
Paths
Path Paths Subpaths
generation OD flows
OD flows
Route choice
Route choices Route choices • En-route
Travel times Travel times Route choice
• Pre-trip
Meso Model Micro Model • En-route
Vehicles,
Traffic -
conditions
(a) Generic Integration Architecture (b) Simplified Integration Architecture
FIGURE 1 Integration Architecture

===== PAGE 15 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 15
Incident 1 Incident 2
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Mezzo MITSIMLab Mezzo
FIGURE 2 Test network

===== PAGE 16 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 16
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1000 1500 2000 2500
Time (s)
(a) Cumulative flow (b) Density
(a) Cumulative flow (b) Density over time
FIGURE 3 Case Study I results
)enal/mk/hev(
ytisneD
1200
Mezzo
Segment 0
1100 Mezzo
Segment 1
1000 Mezzo
Segment 2
900 Mezzo
Segment 3
800 Mezzo
Segment 4
700 MITSIMLab Segment 5
600
500
400
300
1000 1500 2000 2500
Time (s)
)enal/hev(
wolF
evitalumuC

===== PAGE 17 =====

Wilco Burghout, Haris Koutsopoulos, Ingmar Andréasson 17
Measurement
locations, one
for each
direction
Meso
Micro
FIGURE 4 Application of Hybrid model (MiMe) on Brunnsviken / Stockholm network.
