===== PAGE 1 =====

Transpn. Res.-B. Vol. 298. No. 2. pp. 79-93, 1995
Coowieht 0 1995 ElsevierS cience Ltd
Pergamon Printed’& &eat Britain. All rights reserved
0191-2615195 $9.50 + .OO
0191-2615(94)00022-O
THE CELL TRANSMISSION MODEL,
PART II: NETWORK TRAFFIC
CARLOS F. DAGANZO
Department of Civil Engineering and Institute of Transportation Studies,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, U.S.A.
(Received 24 November 1993)
Abstract-This article shows how the evolution of multi-commodity traffic flows over complex
networks can be predicted over time, based on a simple macroscopic computer representation of
traffic flow that is consistent with the kinematic wave theory under all traffic conditions. The
method does not use ad hoc procedures to treat special situations. After a brief review of the basic
model for one link, the article describes how three-legged junctions can be modeled. It then
introduces a numerical procedure for networks, assuming that a time-varying origin-destination
(O-D) table is given and that the proportion of turns at every junction is known. These assump-
tions are reasonable for numerical analysis of disaster evacuation plans. The results are then
extended to the case where, instead of the turning proportions, the best routes to each destination
from every junction are known at all times. For technical reasons explained in the text, the
procedure is more complicated in this case, requiring more computer memory and more time for
execution. The effort is estimated to be about an order of magnitude greater than for the static
traffic assignment problem on a network of the same size. The procedure is ideally suited for
parallel computing. It is hoped that the results in the article will lead to more realistic models of
freeway flow, disaster evacuations and dynamic traffic assignment for the evening commute.
1. INTRODUCTION
Despite all the attention that dynamic assignment is receiving today in the literature
(Transportation Research, 1991), most of the research efforts in that field seem to be
directed at improving the route choice mechanisms of drivers with various levels of
information and/or at refining the algorithms. Little work is aimed at enhancing the
realism of the basic building blocks of the predictions- the underlying traffic perfor-
mance models. A recent overview of this literature is given in Ran ( 1993) and Janson and
Robles (1993).
Some of the works reviewed in these references attempt to predict some form of
system equilibrium, assuming that the travel time on an arc of the network can be
expressed as an increasing function of the flow on the arc at the time. This, however, is a
futile exercise for a rather obvious reason: If a bottleneck causes a queue spanning a
whole arc to form, the result would be high travel times and low flow-an outcome that
cannot be predicted with a simple flow-time relationship.
In an attempt to correct this deficiency, some of the more advanced models define
the arc travel time for an entering vehicle as a function of the current arc occupancy as
well as entering and exiting flows. Unfortunately, such a generalization does not have the
desired effect: Absurd results are still obtained whenever a vehicle’s travel time on an arc
is allowed to depend in any way on the arc entry and/or exit flow at the time of entry
(Daganzo, 1993~). ’
The preceding comments are not meant to be critical of specific works. 2 Rather, they
are meant to illustrate that the state of the art in dynamic traffic assignment is not yet
‘A formulation based on arc occupancy alone can make some physical sense in the special case where it can
be interpreted as a network of dimensionless (or point) queues, but such a representation could only apply if
congestion is so mild that queues do not spill over arcs. If this happens, the predictions with a point queue
model can be diametrically opposed to those of a model with spatial queues (Daganzo and Lin, 1993b).
*The coarseness of models, in a way, should be expected because transportation networks are more compli-
cated than those arising in other fields (than, e.g., electrical networks or hydraulic networks), as they involve
particles that are destined for specific points in the network with little understood interactions.
79

===== PAGE 2 =====

80 C. F. DAGANZO
very advanced and to establish the need for improvements. A basic theory of dynamic
assignment would have to include at the least realistic models of
1. Traffic behavior when the vehicle paths are known (so that arc travel times can be
predicted)
2. Path choice when the time-varying arc times are known
3. Equilibrium to reconcile the predictions of items 1 and 2.
Arguably, item 1 is the least understood of these three items and will thus be the focus of
the following discussion.
The conventional macroscopic approach to simulate freeway traffic behavior over
networks keeps track of the number of vehicles in discrete sections of the network as time
passes. The vehicle occupancy in each section is increased by the number of vehicles
allowed to enter the section in each time interval, and is decreased by the number of
vehicles allowed to leave it.
When simulating the kinematic wave model of Lighthill and Whitham (1955) and
Richards ( 1956) -the LWR model-the outflow is typically specified to be a function of
the occupancy of the section emitting the flow and not to be an explicit function of the
downstream occupancy. Such approaches do not converge to the desired solution and
cannot produce reasonable results (Newell, 1988)3; obviously, traffic could be sent into a
section even after it reaches its maximum occupancy. Perhaps in recognition of this
problem, some researchers have proposed to introduce constraints on the flows to ensure
that section occupancies remain between zero and the maximum possible (Algadhi &
Mahmassani, 1990; Chang et al., 1985; Sheffi et al., 1982). Unfortunately, such improve-
ments do not guarantee convergence; a symptom of nonconvergence is that stopped
traffic is still predicted not to flow into an empty freeway.
For higher-order models, alternative formulations which include downstream infor-
mation have been proposed but they still require heuristic protections against unreason-
able results (Cremer et al., 1993). Because the dynamics of higher-order models have not
been properly linked to any model of sensible driver behavior-as has been done for
the LWR model (Newell, 1961)-and because said models have been shown to exhibit
undesirable properties (de1 Castillo et al., 1993), this article will focus on the LWR
model.
The nonconvergence problem is serious because, as is well known (see Ansorge,
1990, for example), the LWR model usually has multiple solutions but only one that is
physically relevant. Numerical methods must not only approximate the partial differential
equations of the LWR theory but they must also identify automatically the proper solu-
tion.
Ways of addressing these difficulties for a single link exist. See the methods of Lax
(1954)-tested in Michalopoulos et al. (1984)-Luke ( 1972), Newell (1993), and Da-
ganzo (1994). Lax’s procedure is a finite difference approximation,4 whereas Luke’s and
Newell’s methods are exact. Lax’s method converges to the physically relevant LWR
solution but uses a procedure where vehicles do not always move forward; this may limit
its practical appeal. Luke’s method is computationally demanding but it can be stream-
lined in an important special case (Newell, 1993); with Newell’s method solutions can be
obtained easily by hand. Newell ( 1993) also describes a procedure for handling a single
freeway. The finite difference procedure in Daganzo (1994) applies to the special case
considered in Newell (1993). It moves vehicles forward and converges rapidly. Indica-
tions are that the procedure can be extended to the general case (Daganzo, 1993~).
Although more memory intensive than Newell’s method, the procedure seems easier to
program and can be generalized readily to complicated networks. Here we show how this
can be done.
To limit the number of junction types to be studied, we shall restrict our attention to
‘This reference also discusses methods intended to approximate higher-order models (e.g. Payne, 1971).
“Michalopoulos et al. (1993) test and describe other (more complex) finite difference approximations
which require fitting the shocks.

===== PAGE 3 =====

Cell transmission model 81
networks with three-legged junctions. In that case, only two junction types are needed:
merges and diverges. Most freeway networks can be represented in this manner. For the
most part, it will also be assumed that the best route between every origin and every
destination is independent of traffic conditions and is therefore known. Route choice
issues are discussed at the end of this article.
After a brief description of the cell-transmission results in Daganzo (1994), the next
section describes how a network with three-legged junctions should be represented. Sec-
tion 3 then introduces equations for merges and diverges that define boundary conditions
for every arc of the network. These equations are used in an approximation procedure for
networks, were it is assumed that the turning percentages at every diverge are given.
Section 4 shows how the boundary conditions and the network approximation procedure
should be modified when the turning percentages are determined by the destination mix
in the traffic stream. The section also describes a procedure for predicting the evolution
of traffic over a network. Section 5 describes the accuracy and efficiency of the proce-
dure. Finally, Section 6 briefly discusses route choice and equilibrium issues (items 2 and
3 in the preceding list).
2. THE CELL-TRANSMISSION REPRESENTATION OF A NETWORK
2.1. Background
In Daganzo ( 1994), it is shown that if the relationship between traffic flow (4) and
density (k) is of the form depicted in Fig. 1:
q = min{uk, qmaxM, k, - k)}, for 0 I k I k, (1)
then the LWR equations for a single highway link can be approximated by a set of
difference equations where current conditions (the state of the system) are updated with
the tick of a clock. In the preceding expression, v, q,,,=, w and k, are constants denoting,
respectively, the free-flow speed, the maximum flow (or capacity), the speed with which
disturbances propagate backward when traffic is congested (the backward wave speed)
and the maximum (or jam) density.
The method assumes that the road has been divided into homogeneous sections
(cells), i, whose lengths equal the distance traveled by free-flowing traffic in one clock
interval. (Although a closer approximation to the LWR results is obtained with short cell
FLOW
A
ki ---
++f
/Pi,
/ \
9
max
t
kj
DENSITY
Fig. 1. The equation of state of the cell-transmission model.

===== PAGE 4 =====

82 C. F. DAGANZO
lengths, e.g. 100 meters, the procedure can be applied with cells of any length.) The state
of the system at instant t is then given by the number of vehicles contained in each cell,
n,( t ). The following parameters are defined for each cell:
N,(t): The maximum number of vehicles that can be present in cell i at time t
Q,(t): The maximum number of vehicles that can flow into cell i when the clock
advances from t to t + 1.
These constants can vary with time (e.g. as per the occurrence of transient traffic inci-
dents), but this dependence will be ignored in this article for simplicity of notation. The
first constant is defined to be the product of the cell’s length and its jam density, and the
second one is the product of the clock interval and the cell’s capacity.
If cells are numbered consecutively starting with the upstream end of the road from i
= 1 to Z, the recursive relationship of the cell-transmission model can be expressed as
n,(t + 1) = n,(t) + y,(t) -r,+,(t)
where y,( t) is the inflow to cell i in the time interval (t, t + 1 ), given by
y,(t) = min{n,-,(t), Q,(t), NN,(t) - n,(t)11
where 6 = w/v. 5 Note the similarity of eqns ( 1) and (2b).
For finite roads, boundary conditions can be specified by means of input and output
cells. The output cell, a sink for all exiting traffic, should have infinite size (N,,, = 00 )
and a suitable, possibly time-varying, capacity. Input flows can be modeled by a cell pair.
A source cell numbered 00 with an infinite number of vehicles (n, (0) = 00 ) discharges
into an empty gate cell 0 of infinite size, N,(t) = 00. The inflow capacity Q,,(t) of the
gate cell should then be set equal to the desired link input flow for the corresponding time
interval. The gate cell then acts as a metering device that releases traffic at the desired rate
while holding (as a parking lot would) any flow that is unable to enter the link. (Although
it may be possible to eliminate gate cells in an efficient computer implementation, the
program logic should preserve their effects. Gate cells ensure that any time-dependent
O-D table can be handled; i.e. that the LWR problem is well posed for all O-D tables.)
2.2. The network representation
A general transportation network is usually described by a directed graph of nodes
and arcs, including some physical data for each arc. We take this representation as a
point of departure for our discussion, assuming that an arc’s physical data include its
length and the parameters defining a q-k relation of the type shown in Fig. 1.
It should be clear that each arc of a network can be treated as in Section 2.1, once
appropriate boundary conditions at both of its ends have been defined. Thus, we assume
that each arc of the graph has been subdivided into cells, as explained earlier. For general
graphs, however, it is no longer possible to number the cells consecutively and specify
that vehicles should always proceed to the cell numbered next.
Instead, it is convenient to describe the system of cells as the nodes {I} of a more
detailed graph and the possible vehicle transfers by a set of links {k } . (From now on, we
use the term link for the components of the detailed graph to avoid confusion with the
arcs of the original graph. ) Capital letters will be used to denote cells and lowercase letters
for links.
The topology of the detailed network is defined by specifying for each link, k, a
beginning cell and an ending cell. These will be denoted by adding the prefixes B and E to
the link label, so that the beginning and ending cells of k become Bk and Ek.
In Section 2.1 Q, denoted the maximum number of vehicles that could enter cell i per
‘For reasons explained in Daganzo (1994), the accuracy of the approximation is enhanced if 6 is redefined
as& = l,ifn,_,(t) I Q,(t)andd = w/v,ifn,_,(r) > Q,(r).

===== PAGE 5 =====

Cell transmission model 83
unit time, assuming that there was room to store them (i.e. it represented the maximum
possible flow on the link from i - 1 to i). Alternatively, we could have defined Qi to be
the maximum possible flow through cell i, as an indicator of cell width, and then defined
the minimum of Qi_] and Q, to be the maximum flow from i - 1 to i. This revised
definition is more convenient for network modeling and will be adopted here. Thus, each
cell will be characterized by a maximum occupancy N, and a maximum throughput Q,.
The foregoing departs from the classical representation of a transportation network
in that both, the state of the system (i.e. the cell vehicle occupancies at any given time)
and the network performance characteristics (N, and QI ), are nodal quantities. In our
formulation, links will play a minor role; they will simply define the connection of the
cells, ensuring that vehicles are transferred among the proper nodes.
2.3. Network topologies allowed
We consider here networks where the maximum number of arcs (links) entering and/
or leaving a node (cell) is 3. Thus, cells can be classified into three types: diverge if only
one link enters the cell but two leave it, merge if two links enter and one leaves, and
ordinary if one enters and one leaves. Origins and destinations can be modeled with
ordinary cells as explained in Section 2.1.
The basic modeling block, a three-legged junction, will consist of the merge (diverge)
cell, the two links entering (leaving) it and the two cells at the other end of these links;
see Figs. 2a and 2b. To identify all the components of the junction relative to one of its
links (k), the prefixes c and C will be used: ck will denote the other (complementary) link
in the modeling block, and Ck the third (complementary) cell (i.e. the cell which is
neither Bk nor Ek). The flows on links k and ck will then be determined from functions
similar to eqn (2b), which would have as arguments the characteristics and occupancies
of nodes Bk, Ek and Ck.
Before investigating the form of these equations, note that a highway network with
three-legged junctions might then include some links that belong to more than one junc-
tion (e.g. as part of both a diverge and a merge; see Fig. 3a). The presence of such links
would complicate the link flow equations that are about to be presented and will not be
allowed. No generality is lost because multi-junction links can be eliminated with a faster
(a) MERGE
(b) DIVERGE
Fig. 2. Representation of a merge and diverge.

===== PAGE 6 =====

84 C. F. DAGANZO
Ze
k
(a) INVALID
(b) VALID
Fig. 3. Valid and invalid representations.
ticking clock (and shorter cells), as shown in Fig. 3b. Thus, with our representation, links
can only belong to one of three classes: merge links, which belong to a merge junction;
diverge links,” which belong to a diverge junction; and ordinary links, which join ordi-
nary cells.
3. THE DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS: PERCENTAGE OF TURNS KNOWN
The general procedure for networks involves two steps for each tick of the clock:
1. Determine the flow on each link with the equivalent of eqn (2b).
2. Update the cell occupancies by transferring the flows of step 1 from the beginning cell
to the end cell of each link.
The procedure is now explained for ordinary links, merges and diverges.
3.1. Ordinary links
If we let yk( t) denote the flow on link k from clock tick t to clock tick t + 1, and 6,
the wave speed coefficient of cell 1, the equivalent of eqn (2b) for an ordinary link is
For simplicity of notation, the time variable t is omitted from the right side of the
preceding equation and in forthcoming expressions. It should be understood that any
time-dependent quantities should be valued at t unless explicitly noted otherwise.
A further simplification is desirable. If we define
sI(t) = min{Q,, nil and (3a)
mini
R,(t) = QI, UN, - el) (3b)

===== PAGE 7 =====

Cell transmission model 85
as the maximum flows that can be sent and received by cell Z in the interval between t and
t + 1, then we can write yk( t) in the more compact form:
yk(f) = min{&,, &I (4)
That is, the flow on link k should be the maximum that can be sent by its upstream cell
unless prevented to do so by its end cell. If blocked in this manner, the flow is the
maximum allowed by the end cell.
Equation (4) is interesting because it indicates the direction of causality. During time
periods when S,, < REk, the flow on link k is dictated by upstream traffic conditions-
as would be predicted from the forward-moving characteristics of the LWR model. Con-
versely, when S,, > REk, flow is dictated by downstream conditions and backward-
moving characteristics.
Step (2) is then completed by taking the link flows away from the beginning cells and
adding them to the ending cells:
n’,(t + 1) = n,(t + 1) -Yk(t), for6 all k (5a)
%k(r + 1) = n’,(t + 1) +Y,(t) for all k (5b)
We now explain the extensions of eqn (2b) for merge and diverge links. We assume
that the LWR model holds for each arc of the original network, subject to proper bound-
ary conditions at each of its ends. In Daganzo (1994), the boundary conditions were
captured by origin and destination cells with a time-dependent capacity. For an arc ending
in a merge or diverge, the boundary conditions should relate the flow at its extreme point
to the flows at the extremes of the other arcs incident on the same junction.
Note that in the cell-transmission representation the boundary conditions will only
involve the flows on the two links of a merge or diverge. Such conditions must include a
flow conservation equation. This, however, is not sufficient to determine future flows
from current conditions; other side conditions are needed. They should depend on the
particular characteristics of the junction (e.g. priorities) and will be introduced separately
for merges and diverges.
3.2. Merges
In the real world, a merge can be in one of three possible causality regimes:
1. Forward: If the flow on both approaches is dictated by conditions upstream (i.e. waves
move forward)
2. Backward: If the flow on both approaches is dictated by conditions downstream (i.e.
waves move backward)
3. Mixed: If the flow is dictated by conditions upstream for one approach and down-
stream for the other.
Case 1 arises if both approaches are flowing freely. Case 2 arises when both approaches
are congested due to the junction’s lack of capacity or to congestion downstream. Case 3,
which is less common, arises when an approach with priority crowds out traffic on its
complementary approach.’ Boundary conditions should be found that properly reflect
these three possibilities.* We specify conditions directly in cell-transmission form; the
continuous model equivalences follow trivially.
Given the maximum flow that can be emitted by the two sending cells (S,, and & ),
the boundary equations should specify the advancing flows y, and yck as a function of the
?he occupancies, II; (t + l), are intermediate variables introduced for mathematical notation purposes;
they can be eliminated during computer implementation.
‘In this last case, conditions upstream of the intersection on the congested approach are dictated by past
conditions upstream of the merge on the uncongested approach.
&rhe conditions should be similar, but not identical, to those one would have for two merging pipes
carrying a compressible fluid.

===== PAGE 8 =====

86 C. F. DAGANZO
maximum flow that can be received immediately downstream: REk. (The variables S,, ,
S,-, and REk, which capture the current state of the system at the junction, are proxies for
the traffic densities at the junction.)
Clearly, the flows must satisfy
Yk(f) 5 &ik;Yck(f) 5 SC, and (6a)
uk(t) + ~ck(f) 5 REP (6b)
But this is not enough to identify the flows unless additional relations are introduced. As
was done for ordinary cells and links, it will be assumed that cells Bk and Ck send the
maximum traffic possible if cell Ek can receive it-we will see in due course how the final
result relates to the three possible states of causality.
Thus,
yk(f) = Sk and yck(f) = Sck9 if R, > &l/c + &, (W
If the condition in eqn (7a) is not satisfied, we will assume that the maximum number
possible of vehicles, REk(f), advances into Ek. As long as the supply of vehicles from
both approaches, S,(t) and S,(t), is not exhausted, we will assume that a fraction (Pk )
of the vehicles comes from Bk and the remainder (pck ) from Ck, where Pk + p& = 1.
The constants p are characteristics of the intersection that capture any priorities.
(Absolute priority to approach k, for example, would imply that pk = 1 and p& = 0.)
If the supply of vehicles on one of the approaches is exhausted before the end of the time
interval between clock ticks, then the remaining vehicles to advance will come from its
complementary approach.
A simple formula for the advancing flows can be identified with the help of Fig. 4.
The rectangle in the figure represents the set of flows satisfying eqns (6a) and the (im-
plicit) nonnegativity restrictions. Three cases of eqn (6b) are depicted; points below
/I
yk = SBk
Fig. 4. Diagram of feasible flows for a merge junction.

===== PAGE 9 =====

Cell transmission model 87
downsloping line i (or ii, or iii) satisfy eqn (6b). The figure also displays the line y,/y,
= pck/pk , representing the flows that advance before the supply is exhausted.
Equation (7a) arises when the downsloping line does not intersect the rectangle (case
3) and the flows are the coordinates of point P. This corresponds to forward causality
regime 1. When the upward- and downward-sloping lines intersect inside the rectangle
(case l), a supply of vehicles will remain on both approaches when time expires and the
solution flows are at the intersecting point (Q). This corresponds to backward causality
regime 2. If the sloping lines intersect outside the rectangle but the downsloping line
intersects the rectangle (case 2), then the solution must be on the downsloping line (since
there is more demand than available room). Moreover, since the supply on one of the
approaches is exhausted before time expires, the solution must also be on the side of the
rectangle intersected by the upward sloping line; the point of intersection (R) is the
solution. This corresponds to mixed causality regime 3.
We note that for both cases 1 and 2, the solution point is the middle point of the
three points intersected by the downsloping line (R, R’ and R” ) or (Q, Q’ and Q” ).
Thus we can write
yk(f) = midjSBk,R Ek - Sk, pkREk) and (7a)
&k
Yck ( t ) = mid 1 &k, &k - , pckREk > (7b)
if R, < &I, + (7c)
&‘k
Equations (7a) and (7b)- the generalization of eqn (4) to merges-uniquely define the
flows through a merge during time interval (t, t + 1). These flows are then used with eqn
(5) to update the cell occupancies of the diverge.
A simulation for two highways that merge into one is easy to build using a computer
spreadsheet consisting of two separate ranges-similar to the ones described in the appen-
dix of Daganzo ( 1993a)-linked to a third range that contains the merge cell and eqns
(7). As in that reference, experiments with such a simulation confirm that the simulated
behavior of the merge approximates the LWR model.
For causality regime 1, this can also be verified manually by inspecting the steady-
state solution to the difference equations (with very small clock ticks) for a network
such as in Fig. 2a (consisting of two equilibrium link flows and three equilibrium cell
occupancies), when the input flows to cells Bk and Ck are constant. The predictions also
match if the combined input flows exceed the capacity of Ek so that a queue exists on one
or both of the approaches (i.e. under causality regimes 2 and 3).
Nothing in our formulation prevents the p values, like the other cell characteristics
(N, Q and a), to depend on time. (Conceivably, p could also depend on the state of
the end cell.) A time-dependent Q could be used to model ramp metering strategies, a
time-dependent N to model temporary lane closures and a time-dependent p to simulate
traffic signals. For the latter, the priority constant, pk, would alternate between 0 and 1
after a suitable number of clock ticks. Equations (7), however, need to be modified
because a merge controlled by a traffic signal may not allow traffic from the blocked
approach to enter the merge, even when the other approach is idle. If this is true, the
equations are even simpler:
Yk(t) = 0, if pk(t) = 0 (8a)
= min{ &k , hk 1, if pk(t) = 1 (8b)
A variation on eqn (8) would apply if the secondary flow is not totally interrupted when
the high-priority flow is low (e.g. as when right turns are allowed on red). Since eqns (7)
and (8) capture a broad set of conditions, we will not give here an extensive set of recipes
for many forms of control; this may be attempted in the future.
Finally, note that if the p’s are allowed to depend on the cell occupancies upstream
of the merge, traffic-actuated control strategies could also be simulated.

===== PAGE 10 =====

88 C. F. DAGANZO
3.3. Model of a diverge
In deriving boundary conditions for diverges, it should be recognized that the left/
right turn percentages will in general depend on the mix of car destinations present in the
element of flow currently upstream of the junction. This will be examined in Section 4.
Here we assume that the turning proportions are exogenously determined, as would
occur for applications involving emergency evacuations (e.g. due to an imminent nuclear
meltdown or natural disaster). In this case, the logic is very simple.
In Fig. 2b, cell Bk can send a maximum of S,,(t) vehicles during time interval (t, t
+ 1) and cells Ek and Ck can receive a maximum of REk(f) and R&f), respectively.
These three quantities are still given by eqns (3). Because part of S,,(t) is destined for Ek
and part for Ck, it will be assumed (as in Newell, 1993) that all the flow is restricted if
either one of the diverging branches is unable to accommodate its allocation of flow. This
assumes that vehicles unable to exit prevent all those behind, regardless of destination, to
continue. This assumption, which should be suitable for the level of accuracy required of
large-scale models, implies that vehicles at the diverge (and indeed through the network)
are served in a first-in-first-out (FIFO) sequence. ’
We assume here that the proportions of &(t) going each way P&f) and P&t)
t&(t) + p&t) = 1 ] are exogenously determined and that traffic flows in these pro-
portions continuously between clock ticks. Then, the (as yet unknown) number of vehi-
cles emitted by Bk, yBk(t ), determines the turning flows:
Yk ( t ) = &khk and Yck ( t ) = &khk Pa)
As in other cases, the amount of traffic emitted by Bk, yak(t), should be as large as
possible without exceeding the amount that can be received by any of the exiting
branches. This implies that yk I’nUSt not exceed REk and that y,k mUSt IIOt exceed Rck.
These conditions can be expressed mathematically as
The solution to this simple linear program is
hk ( t ) = min { %k , &k/&k, &k/&k 1 (9b)
which together with eqn (9a) defines the flows on a diverge.
As for ordinary and merge links, eqns (5) complete the set of equations needed to
update the state of the system.
4. THE MODEL WITH KNOWN ROUTES: TURNING PERCENTAGES NOT SPECIFIED
It is assumed in this section that the turning percentages at time t are not specified.
Instead, they are derived from the destinations of the vehicles ready to advance into each
diverge at time t and information on the best paths available at the time to reach these
destinations.
A FIFO discipline (consistent with the analysis in prior sections) will be used to
identify the advancing vehicles. The best-path information is assumed to take the form of
route choice constants defined for the two end cells of each diverge, &kd( t) and &kd( t).
They give the proportion of vehicles with destination d that would advance from Bk to
each of the two end cells in the time interval from t to t + 1. As before, these constants
91n actuality, especially when the exit percentage is low, the blockage does not occur instantaneously.
Furthermore, even after the conditions have settled into a stable pattern, freeway traffic is never at jam density
next to the ramp. Observation of real systems reveals that the freeway traffic density upstream of a blocked
diverge increases gradually toward the jam density in the upstream direction and that the density on the through
lane(s) is less than on the exit lane(s). This allows through vehicles to negotiate the diverge more rapidly than
exiting vehicles. A more detailed analysis of this phenomenon would require an extension of the LWR theory,
involving two vehicle types. Such a theory could be useful for traffic engineering studies of freeway interchanges
and weaving sections, but it is beyond the scope of this article.

===== PAGE 11 =====

Cell transmission model 89
must be between 0 and 1, and must satisfy p&t) + /3ckd(t ) = 1. We will discuss later
how these constants can be calculated.
To use such route choice information within the model, it is necessary to record cell
occupancies, disaggregated by destination. In addition, to ensure the FIFO discipline
when cells cannot emit all their contents, it will also be necessary to keep track of the time
waited by the cell occupants. Thus, we characterize the state of the system by a variable,
nldr( t), representing the number of vehicles in cell Z at time t bound for destination d that
entered the cell in the time interval immediately after clock tick (t - 7). The parameter 7
is a measure of time waited. Keeping track of r is important because on arrival to a
congested cell, vehicles with high r must advance before those with a low 7.
Like cell occupancies, link flows must also be disaggregated by destination and wait.
We use y&f) to represent the number of vehicles flowing on link k during (t, t + 1)
that ( 1) are bound for d, and (2) had entered cell Bk in the 7th interval before t.
4. I. The procedure with disaggregated occupancies and flo ws
As before, the overall algorithm will consist of a flow calculation step 1 and an
occupancy revision step 2.
With disaggregated variables, the expressions for the second step-previously eqn
(5)-should ensure that advancing vehicles have their 7 reset to 1 while the rest have it
increased by 1. The new formulas are
hkdl ( t + 1 ) = & Ykdr for all k,d (loa)
and
nBkdr+ I ( t + 1 ) = nBkdr - Ykdr for all k,d,r (lob)
In these equations, r ranges from 1 to the number of time periods present in cell Bk at
time t, rk( t).
Since the occupancies are disaggregated by destination and wait, the first step can be
reduced to the identification of (real) variables aI( t) for every cell, denoting the minimum
wait of the vehicles leaving each cell in interval (t, t + 1). Under FIFO, the a,‘s readily
indicate which vehicles are allowed to flow.
Accordingly, we assume that the disaggregated flows on a diverge link k are given by
the following function of aBk:
if T> la&l+ (lla)
Ykd? ( tyaBk ) = nBkdr&kd9
= (r - if 7= l&k(+ (llb)
aBk ) nBkdr &kd ?
= 0, if r < 1a Bk1 + (llc)
where laBk I + denotes the SIUglleSt integer equal to or greater than &k. For ordinary or
merge links, eqn ( 11) applies with flEkd = 1.
Logically, eqn ( 11) indicates that all the occupants of Bk that have entered cell Bk in
a time interval prior to t - aBk (i.e. with 7 > I a, 1 +) advance. Conversely, none of
those with r < Ia,, I + advance. Of those vehicles having entered cell Bk in the time
interval containing time t - aBk, only a fraction equal to the proportion of the interval
that precedes aBk (i.e. r - ask) is advanced. This preserves the FIFO order to the accu-
racy allowed by the simulation clock tick. lo
The next subsection explains how the a, are calculated.
“Although eqn ( 11) ensures that vehicles entering a cell in time interval r cannot leave the cell before those
having entered in earlier intervals (r + 1, z + 2, r + 3 . . . ), it does not differentiate among the vehicles
entering in the same clock interval. This departure from FIFO should not pose a serious problem because only a
very small proportion of the total network flow is affected by this approximation. In any case, its effects can be
minimized by choosing faster clocks.

===== PAGE 12 =====

90 C. F. DAGANZO
4.2. Minimum link waits
To determine the minimum link waits, it is convenient to define two functions relat-
ing aggregated link flows to a,. If indexed by destination only, the link flow is
Ykd ( haBk) = ? Ykdr ( h@Bk) (12)
The total aggregate flow is
(13)
The inverse relationship between &,k and yk will help us identify the a,. As is illus-
trated in Fig. 5, eqns (11) to (13) define nonincreasing, piecewise-linear functions with
changes in slope at the integers. Because these functions are nonincreasing, it is possible
to define a nonincreasing inverse function of eqn ( 13 ), A,, which gives the minimum wait
at the link’s source Cell,a Bk, for a given aggregate flOW,y,":
(14)
aBk = Ak ( t,yk)
Equations (13) and (14) can be constructed concurrently in tabular form.
Equations (13) and (14) are only meaningful for a range of flows between zero and
the maximum that can be sent, &. [For diverges, flows satisfy 0 5 yk(t,aBk) + yc
k( t,aBk) s &k .] Accordingly, aBk ranges from the smallest value not violating the
maximum flow constraint, which is denoted by &k(t) and may be zero, to the maximum
wait present in the upstream cell, which is denoted by rBk( t). Note that for diverges
&k(f) = ABk*
We are now in a position to identify a,(t) for the three basic types of cells.
Ordinary and merge cells. Since only one link (k) leaves any such cell (Bk), these
cells emit vehicles without a route choice. As a result, vehicle destinations do not influence
A
Y
c
1 2 3 4 5 aBk
Fig. 5. Graphical representation of y,,,ft,uBk) and JJ~(f ,aac).
“Equation (14) will have a jump discontinuity whenever eqn (13) is constant. In what follows, it does not
matter how a,, is valued at any such jump; we can assume, for example, that a,, is right continuous, taking on
the smallest possible value at each jump.

===== PAGE 13 =====

Cell transmission model 91
the advancing flows and the emitted flow yk can be obtained from the total cell occupanc-
ies as in Section 3; that is, using eqn (3), and either eqn (4) for ordinary links or eqns
(7a) and (7b) for merge links. Then, eqn (14) yields a,,.
Diverges. Although the aggregate flows at a diverge cannot be obtained directly from
eqn (Sb), it is not difficult to generalize this result. As in Section 3.3, a diverge cell, Bk,
will send as much flow as possible on both its branches, k and ck, provided that the flows
sent satisfy the capacity constraints for the sending cell and the two receiving cells. Thus,
a&t) should be the smallest value satisfying
and
Yk ( tpaBk ) 5 &k, yck ( t&k ) 5 &k
Yk(&aBk) + yck(tyaBk) s SBk
Because the left sides of these inequalities are nonincreasing and the last inequality is
satisfied if and only if a,& z A,, the solution is
(15)
aBk = max{Ak(f,REk),Ack(f,RCk),ABkJ
With the a, known, an iteration of the procedure can now be completed. ‘*
5. COMPUTATIONAL ISSUES
A computer program which carries out the procedure described in Sections 3 and 4
for general networks has been written (Lin and Daganzo, 1993). Its results match satis-
factorily the predictions of the LWR theory for special cases that can be solved by hand.
Two such examples are reported in Daganzo and Lin (1993a); one of the examples
illustrates the evolution of the traffic states when an incident in one of the branches of a
diverge blocks traffic temporarily; the resulting queue spills onto the upstream freeway
section and eventually dissipates.
As a point of reference for an evaluation of the computational complexity of our
procedure, we use the static traffic assignment problem. With careful definition of the
data structures, the RAM memory needed to implement the procedure is a couple of times
smaller than the product of the number of links L, the number of destinations D and the
average of 7&(t), T: LDT. This can be compared with the requirements for the static
traffic assignment problem, which are comparable to AD, where A is the number of arcs.
Because A is perhaps an order of magnitude smaller than L, we see that the memory
required by the cell-transmission model should be about 5T times larger than that of the
static traffic assignment. The factor T can be roughly viewed as the ratio of the average
free-flow speed for the network (e.g. 40 mph) and the actual average at the most con-
gested instant during the study period (e.g. 20 mph). For large networks Tis not likely to
be large, at most being comparable with 2 or 3. Thus, it appears that the memory
requirements are about an order of magnitude larger than for an equivalent static traffic
assignment problem.
The speed of execution with a single processor can also be estimated. Each clock tick
requires a simple set of calculations to be done for every cell and every link. Because each
link requires each destination and each 7 to be considered, the number of calculations per
tick should be on the order of LDT. For large networks, this compares well with the
number of calculations for an iteration of the static equilibrium traffic assignment model,
which is proportional to the number of the destinations but grows supralinearly with the
number of nodes in network. On the other hand, we may need to perform more iterations
than are normally done for static equilibrium models in order to simulate a rush-hour
period. All things considered, thus, the execution time may also be an order of magnitude
greater than for static equilibrium models.
“In addition to the cell occupancies, we should also update the maximum wait for each cell. Since by time
t + 1 all the vehicles having entered Bk before t - uBkt() will have advanced, the maximum wait at that time
by a remaining vehicle is 1 + ask(t). Clearly then, rsk( t + 1) = 11 + ask 1+ .

===== PAGE 14 =====

92 C. F. DAGANZO
If this performance seems too cumbersome for application to large networks, the
reader should recognize that the equations we have proposed are ideally suited for mas-
sively parallel computing. (Today these machines are approaching computation speeds of
1 teraflop, or lOI floating point calculations per second, which could be used to simulate
very large networks in the blink of an eye.) A large regional network can be decomposed
into small subnetworks corresponding to different subareas of the study region; then,
thanks to the order-free property of the cell transmission model, the algorithm can oper-
ate simultaneously and independently on the data for these subnetworks.
6. APPLICATIONS AND COMMENTS
The previous section assumed that the desired route between each origin and destina-
tion was known for all times. Thus, we were able to define turn constants /3,,,(t) for every
downstream cell of a diverge. This is reasonable if we assume (as in Horowitz, 1984) that
drivers respond to some weighted average of their past driving experiences and that such
experiences determine the turn constants. The network model described in this article
could then be used to simulate a sequence of days to see if an equilibrium is reached. The
model could also be used to determine the type of real-time information that is likely to
be of most value to drivers. (Preliminary analyses with the model indicate, not to great
surprise, that driver advisories should anticipate the projected evolution of the system;
Daganzo and Lin, 1993b.)
Dynamic network models can also be applied to evaluate the performance of emer-
gency evacuation plans developed in response to the possibility of a disaster such as a
nuclear meltdown (Sheffi, et al., 1982). Because in such an instance time is of the essence,
a realistic model of network performance under a dynamic load is necessary. Evacuations
are easier to study than the general dynamic traffic assignment model because traffic can
be modeled as a single commodity flowing to a unique hypothetical destination, safety. I3
An evacuation plan, consisting of a set of /3,( r)‘s not differentiated by destination, could
then be easily evaluated with the proposed approach.
Recent theoretical results (Daganzo, 1993b) indicate that the model discussed in this
article can be extended to general equations of state with minor modifications. These new
results might also allow larger cells (e.g., 1 Km long) to be used on long homogeneous
freeway segments and shorter cells (e.g., 100 m long) on ramps and interchanges. The
memory requirements of the models could then be reduced at the cost of some accuracy.
Efforts toward the development of more refined models of diverge behavior (see
footnote 9) also seem worthwhile and are currently under way.
REFERENCES
Algadhi, S. A. H., & Mahmassani, H. (1990). Modelling crowd behavior and movement: Application to
Makkah pilgrimage. In M. Koshi (Ed.), Transportation cmd traffic theory, Proceedings of the 1 lth Interna-
tional Symposium on Transportation and Traffic Theory, Yokohama, Japan (pp. 59-78). New York:
Elsevier.
Ansorge, R. (1990). What does the entropy condition mean in traffic flow theory? Trans. Res., Z&?(2), 133-
143.
de1 Castillo, J. M., Pintado, P., & Benitez, F. G. (1993). A formulation for the reaction time of traffic flow
models. In C. Daganzo (Ed.), Trunsportution and traffic theory, Proceedings of the 12th International
Symposium on Transportation and Traffic Theory, Berkeley, CA (pp. 387405). New York: Elsevier.
Chang, Cl. L., Mahmassani, H., and Herman, R. (1985). Macroparticle traffic simulation model to investigate
peak-period commuter decision dynamics. Trans. Res. Rec., 1005, 107-121.
Cremer, M., Meissner, F., & Schrieber, S. (1993). On predictive control schemes in dynamic rerouting strate-
gies. In C. Daganzo (Ed.), Transportation und truffic theory, Proceedings of the 12th International Sympo-
sium on Transportation and Traffic Theory, Berkeley, CA (pp. 407-426). New York: Elsevier.
Daganzo, C. F. (1993a). The cell-transmission model. Purt I: A simple dynumic representation of highway
trqffic. Research report, UCB-ITS-PRR-93-7, Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California,
Berkeley.
Daganzo, C. F. (1993b). A finite difference approximation for the kinematic wave model. Trans. Res. (submit-
ted for publication).
“The network would be represented as usual, stopping a sufficient distance from the location of the
disaster. The nodes on the edge of the represented network would then be connected to the imaginary destina-
tion - the safety node-which all traffic would try to reach.

===== PAGE 15 =====

Cell transmission model 93
Daganzo, C. F. (1993c). Properties of link travel time functions under dynamic loads. Working paper, UCB-
ITS-PWP-93-5, Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California, Berkeley.
Daganzo, C. F. (1994). The cell-transmission model: A simple dynamic representation of highway traffic.
Trans. Res., 288(4), 269-281.
Daganzo, C. F., & Lin, W. H. (1993a). Moving queues in traffic networks. In S. Yager & A. Santiago (eds.),
Proceedings of the Engineering Foundation Conference on Issues and Techniques in Traffic Management,
St Petersburg, FL (pp. 121-136). Washington, DC: FHWA.
Daganzo, C. F., & Lin, W. H. (1993b). The spatial evolution of queues during the morning commute in a
sing/e corridor. Working paper, UCB-ITS-PWP-93-7, Institute of Transportation Studies, University of
California, Berkeley (presented at the 1994 meeting of the Transportation Research Board).
Horowitz, J. L. (1984). The stability of stochastic equilibrium in a two-link transportation network. Trans.
Res.. ISB( l), 13-28.
Janson, B. N., & Robles, J. (1993). Dynamic traffic assignment with arrival time costs. In C. Daganzo (Ed.),
Transportation and traffic theory, Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Transportation and
Traffic Theory, Berkeley, CA (pp. 127-146). New York: Elsevier.
Lax, P. D. (1954). Weak solutions of non-linear hyperbolic equations and their numerical computation. Comm.
Pure App. Math., 7, 159-193.
Lighthill, M. J., & Whitham, J. B. (1955). On kinematic waves. I. Flow movement in long rivers. II. A Theory
of traffic flow on long crowded roads. Proc. Royal Sot., A229,281-345.
Lin, W. H., & Daganzo, C. F. (1993). Technical description of NETCELL: General framework and data
structure. Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California, Berkeley (mimeo).
Luke, J. C. (1972). Mathematical models for landform evolution. J. Geoph. Res., 77,2460-2464.
Michalopoulos, P. Ci., Beskos, D. E., & Yamauchi, Y. (1984). Multilane traffic flow dynamics: Some macro-
scopic considerations. Trans. Res., 18B(4/5), 377-395.
Michalopoulos, P. G., Yi, P., & Lyrintzis, A. S. ( 1993). Continuum modelling of traffic dynamics for congested
freeways. Trans. Res.. 27B(4), 315-332.
Newell, G. F. (1961). Non-linear effects in the dynamics of car following. Opns. Res., 9(2), 209-229.
Newell, G. F. (1988). Comments on traffic dynamics. Trans. Res., 23B(5), 386-389.
Newell, G. F. (1993). A simplified theory of kinematic waves in highway traffic, Part I: General theory; Part
II; Queuing at freeway bottlenecks; Part III: Multi-destination flows. Trans. Res., 27B(4), 281-314.
Payne, H. J. (1971). Models of freeway traffic and control. Math. Models Pub/. Sys., Simul. Council Proc.,
28(l), 51-61.
Ran, B. ( 1993). Dynamic transportation network models for advanced traveler information systems. PhD
thesis, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL.
Richards, P. I. (1956). Shockwaves on the highway. Opns. Res., 4,42-51.
Sheffi, Y., Mahmassani, H., &Powell, W. B. (1982). A transportation network evacuation model. Trans. Res.,
16A(3), 209-218.
Transportation Research. (1991). Special issue on dynamic control of urban traffic networks (Part II; N. H.
Gartner & G. Improta, Eds.). Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press.
