===== PAGE 1 =====

Open Traffic Models - A framework for hybrid
simulation of transportation networks
Gabriel Gomes
August 13, 2019
Abstract
This paper introduces a new approach to hybrid traffic modeling, along with its
implementation in software. The software allows modelers to assign traffic models to
individuallinksinanetwork. Eachmodelimplementsaseriesofmethods, referedtoas
the modeling interface. These methods are used by the program to exchange informa-
tion between adjacent models. Traffic controllers are implemented in a similar manner.
The paper outlines the important components of the method: the network description,
the description of demands, and the modeling and control interfaces. We include tests
demonstratingthepropagationofcongestionbetweenpairsofmacroscpoic,mesoscopic,
andmicroscopicmodels. OpenTrafficModelsisanopensourceimplementationofthese
concepts, and is available at https://github.com/ggomes/otm-sim.
1 Introduction
Simulation tools are an integral part of transportation planning and research. As described
by Lieberman (2004), the history of traffic simulators stretches back to the 1950s, and has
proceeded alongside developments in the theory of traffic. This trend has continued to the
present day: about half of the papers in the Transportation Research Board’s 2018 issue on
Intelligent Transportation Systems involve a simulation model. Similar numbers apply to
recent issues of the IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems.
Transportation models can be classified broadly into macroscopic, mesoscopic, and mi-
croscopic models. We adopt here the definitions of van Wageningen-Kessels et al. (2015) for
these terms. Macropscopic models do not distinguish individual vehicles, but instead view
traffic as a coninuum. This approach originates with the work of Lighthill and Whitham
(1955) and Richards (1956), who coupled the “fundamental diagram” of Greenshields (1935)
with the law of conservation of vehicles. In contrast, mesoscopic and microscopic models are
vehicle-based. Microscopic models compute vehicle trajectories based on car-following rules.
Most models in this category use ordinary differential equations to represent the accelera-
tions of a vehicle as a function of the state of its neighbors. The car-following approach is one
of the oldest in transportation modeling, dating back to the work of Chandler et al. (1958).
1
9102
guA
21
]SM.sc[
1v90040.8091:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====

It is used today in most micrscopic simulation software, including SUMO (Krajzewicz et al.,
2006), Aimsun (2019), and CORSIM (2005). Another sub-category of micrscopic models
are those based on cellular automata. Here space is considered as fundamentally discrete,
and the neighborhood of a vehicle consists only of its neighboring cells. These models were
introduced to transportation by Nagel and Schreckenberg (1992). Their compatibility with
image processing algorithms has lead to extremely fast implementations, such as that of
Korˇcek et al. (2011). Mesoscopic models also distinguish individual vehicles, however their
movements depend on aggregate quantities such as capacity and jam density, in addition
to the states of nearby vehicles. Queueing models fall into this category (Zhou and Taylor,
2014).
It has long been recognized that none of these model types is superior to all others, but
instead each has adomain of application (Bourrel and Lesort (2003); Burghout et al. (2005)).
For example, models that stem from the kinematic wave theory capture the propagation of
congestion waves with fewer parameters than microscopic models. They are more parsimo-
nious for the study of congestion-based interventions, such as ramp metering and variable
speed limits on freeways. Conversely, the dynamics of arterial roads is strongly influenced
by traffic signals, with congestion wave speed being of secondary importance. Vehicles form
queues at intersections, and hence queueing models are a good choice for the study of signal
control algorithms.
Figure 1: The boundary between two models: m and m .
u d
Observations such as these have motivated the development of hybrid approaches, in
which different models are applied to different regions of the network. Some early efforts in
this area include those of Bourrel and Lesort (2003), Burghout et al. (2005), and Leclercq
(2007). These studies focused primarily on the design of the transition boundary between
two given models. Figure 1 is used for illustration. Here the upstream and downstream
regions are managed by models m and m respectively. Vehicles crossing the boundary
u d
must be translated from the representation of m into the representation of m . If m is
u d u
microscopic, then the approaching vehicle (vehicle a) may require information from a vehicle
within m (vehicle b), for example to determine its own headway.
d
Most authors have approached this problem by creating a “transition zone” between m
u
and m , where both representations coexist. The focus of these studies has not been on the
d
generic case, but rather on how to preserve consistency in the transition zone between two
particular models m and m . Burghout et al. (2005) studied the coupling of a mesoscopic
u d
model called Mezzo with a microscopic model called MITSIMLab. Bourrel and Lesort (2003)
proposed the combination of the LWR with a compatible microscopic model, such as Newell
(2002). This approach is extended by Leclercq (2007), who notes that no transitions zone is
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

needed if the models are mutually consistent since, in this case, estimates can be made from
upstream information alone. That paper developed a technique for coupling a macroscopic
and a microscopic model, both of which were consistent with LWR.
The goal of the present paper is to develop and demonstrate a more general approach to
the problem. First, it is recognized that the function of the transition zone is to preserve
information that is needed by one model and which may not be easily obtained from the
other. In the example of the figure, if model m is macroscopic, then vehicle b will not
d
have an explicit representation, and thus the headway for vehicle a will be undetermined.
A transition zone would guarantee that there is always a vehicle b from which to compute
a headway. Here however, we will dispense with the transition zone. Instead it will be
the “responsibility” of m to provide a reasonable response when queried by m for the
d u
position of its upstream-most vehicle. This will not be difficult whenever m is vehicle-
d
based (microscopic or mesoscopic). The case of the cell-transmission model is developed in
Section 5.3 .
Section3describestheproposedapproachforcoordinatingtheinteractionsoftwomodels
over a boundary. We will see that the methodology captures a wide range of models, includ-
ing microscopic, mesoscopic, and macroscopic models of first and second order, discretized
with a Godunov scheme. The approach allows the arbitrary partitioning of traffic networks
into sub-networks, each managed by a different traffic model. This type of architecture, in
which link interactions are mediated by a model-agnostic protocol, lends itself well to imple-
mentations in distributed memory. A future publication will present the extension to HPC
(high performance computing).
The concepts described in this paper have been implemented in the Open Traffic Models
project. OTM includes three models representing the three major classes: the cell transmis-
sion model (macro), the two-queue model (meso), and Newell’s car-following model (micro).
Other models can be added, combined, and distributed as plugins, using the OTM inter-
face. OTM also provides several options for controlling (or influencing) traffic. These include
fixed actuators such as traffic signals, ramp meters, variable speed limits, as well as on-board
devices such as driver information systems and routing apps. The control algorithms that
drive these devices can be implemented as plugins as well, using OTM’s control algorithm
interface.
2 Preliminaries
Two basic requirements for the design of a hybrid traffic simulation interface can be stated:
1) it must conserve vehicles, and 2) it must conserve vehicle characteritics. The first require-
ment means simply that vehicles should not be created or destroyed across the interface.
The second depends on which characteristics the modeler wishes to track. For example, the
modeler may assign different performance or emissions characteristics to different popula-
tions, such as cars and trucks. Or they may wish to follow different populations of vehicles
for the purpose of computing performance metrics. It is also possible that different vehicles
have different access to the network infrastructure – e.g. high-occupancy vehicles can use
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

the HOV lane; connected vehicles and drivers with routing-apps have access to an informa-
tion service. This is captured with the vehicle type. The concept of vehicle type gathers all
distinguishing characteristics of the population that we are interested in tracking. Hence the
population is split according to vehicle type, and each type is assigned a unique id.
Vehicles enter the network through a source, attached to a link. A source produces a
stream of vehicles of the given type (multiple sources can be attached to a single link). The
time-varying intensity of the source is specified by the user as a discrete-time profile. Excess
demand, that is, demand that exceeds the flow capacity or holding capacity of the link, is
held in a limitless buffer. The process that produces the vehicles is specified by the user,
and also depends on the model that operates on the source link. A vehicle-based model, for
example, may create vehicles according to a Poisson process, while a fluid model may use a
sequence of independent random variables.
Each vehicle type is assigned a routing behavior. The routing behavior can be either
routed or probabilistic. Routed vehicle types are assigned a route (a.k.a. a path), which is a
sequence of links starting with the given source link. These vehicles travel along the path
and are removed from the network upon exiting the last link in the sequence. They can be
diverted to another path only by a routing actuator, such as a routing app. Probabilistic
vehicles choose their next link at each junction according to turning probabilities, or split
ratios. These vehicles are removed from the simulation when they exit a terminal link in
the network. The split ratios are provided as discrete-time sequences for every junction and
vehicle type. They can be modified during the run by an event (e.g. an accident) or a split
ratio actuator.
2.1 Road segments
The road network consists of an interconnection of road segments, or links. The state of each
link is managed by its model. Figure 2 shows a generic link. Each link has a positive number
of full-length lanes. It may also have partial-length lanes, such as turn pockets. The four
possible partial lane structures are in the “inner-upstream”, “inner-downstream”, “outer-
upstream”, and“outer-downstream” positions. Each partial lane structure is characterized
by its position, number of lanes, length, and gates.
Figure 3(a) shows an intersection approach. The turn pocket is captured as an inner-
downstreampartiallane. Figure3(b)showsanonrampmerge. Themergelaneisrepresented
as an outer-upstream partial lane in link 2. In both cases, access to the partial lanes is
unrestricted. Figure 3(c) depicts a freeway segment with a priority lane with restricted
access. The priority lane can be represented as an inner-downstream (or upstream) partial
lane structure with length equal to the full length of the link. Access to the priority lane
can be restricted to a series of gates, or unrestricted.
2.2 Road parameters
The driving characteristics of the road segments are captured by a set of road parameters.
These parameters are, in general, specific to the model that manages the link. However,
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

Figure 2: Generic road geometry.
Figure 3: Example road geometries
there are basic roadway characteristics that are common to many traffic models. These are
¯
the three parameters of the so-called triangular fundamental diagram: the road capacity (f),
the speed limit (v¯), and the jam-density (ρ¯). See Figure 4.
It is required that the per-lane values of these three quantities be defined for each road
segment. These are interpreted by the models and translated into model-specific parameters.
Thus,abasicdegreeofphysicalconsistencybetweenmodelsisachieved. Themodelsmayalso
require additional parameters to be defined, and these can be provided separately. Section 5
describes how these quantities are interpreted by each of the three canonical models included
with OTM.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

Figure 4: Required road parameters
2.3 Road connections
Thus far we have focused on the geometry and characteristics of isolated road segments.
We will now describe how these road segments are connected. The standard approach for
macroscopic traffic models is to use a graph in which links are identified with edges and
their interconnections are represented as vertices. This approach ignores the finer-grained
interconnections between lanes, which are needed by most microscopic models. Here we use
road connections to specify the relations between links at the lane level.
Figure 5: A freeway offramp
A road connection is a tuple with two elements: a set of upstream lanes and a set of
downstream lanes. r = (lup,ldn). The interpretation of a road connection is that vehicles
r r
that depart the upstream link from a lane contained in lup may enter the downstream link
r
throughanylaneinldn. Figure5showsarepresentationofafreewayofframp. Thethreelinks
r
are the upstream freeway segment (lanes 1 to 4), the downstream freeway segment (lanes
5 to 8), and the offramp (lane 9). The road connections are r = ({1,2,3,4},{5,6,7,8})
1
and r = ({4},{9}). Movements that do not follow road connections are prohibited. For
2
example, vehicles are not allowed to exit the freeway from lane 3. The granularity of the
representation can be controlled by adding or removing road connections. For example,
vehicles can be made to preserve their lanes when moving from one link to the next by
assigning road connections to every individual lane. However this level of detail is often not
needed.
There may be overlap between the upstream lanes of two road connections (lup∩lup (cid:54)= ∅),
r r(cid:48)
and thus a vehicle within the overlap may have turning options (e.g. lane 4 in Figure 5). It
is required that these options lead to different links, so that split ratios specified at the link
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

level may be translated into split ratios between road connections.
2.4 Lane groups
We use the term lane group to mean a set of adjacent lanes that share the same set of exiting
road connections. Lanes in a single lane group can be expected to advance with approxi-
mately equal speed. The model that operates on the link can therefore assign to each lane
group a single speed-synchonized structure. For a microscopic model this would be a lane;
for a mesoscopic model, a FIFO queue; for a macropscopic model it would be an instantia-
tion of the differential equation. The model may choose to create a finer representation (e.g.
lane-by-lane), but this is not required.
2.5 Models and state indices
A model is a program that manages the state of one or more links in the simulation. The
responsibilities of a model are,
1. to maintain the internal state of the lane groups in its links,
2. to emit vehicle packet release requests to the simulator, in order to send vehicles to a
downstream model,
3. to ensure that vehicles only leave the link along road connections that are consistent
with their routing,
4. to receive incoming vehicle packets sent from upstream links,
5. to respond to requests for information from the simulator.
The system requires that models keep track of the type and routing information of all
of the vehicles in their links. The routing information is captured by the route id, if the
vehicle is of a routed type, and by the id of the next downstream link, if the vehicle is of
a probabilistic type. Thus it is assumed that all vehicles (probabilistically routed vehicles
in particular) select upon entering a link, the link to which they will proceed following that
link. This assumption is in contrast to many graph-based models, in which the split ratio is
only applied as vehicles flow through a multi-output node; that is, when they exit the link.
This selection of a next link, whether deterministic (provided by the route) or probabilistic
(provided by split ratios) is computed by the OTM system and attached to the vehicle
packets as they enter the link (see Section 3).
We use the term state index to refer to a pair of vehicle type id and either route id or next
link id, depending on whether the type is routed or probabilistic. Table 1 shows an example
of a lane group with four state indices. The first and second rows correspond to vehicles
of type 1, the third and fourth are vehicles of type 2. If type 1 is routed, then the third
column indicates that these vehicles are on routes 7 and 4. If type 2 is probabilistic then the
third column indicates that these vehicles will proceed to links 23 and 34 after leaving the
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

present link. The values of the states are listed in column four, and are in units of number
of vehicles. These values are defined and managed by the model. The model represented in
the table is a first order fluid model. If it were a second order fluid model, then the values of
the fourth column would be two-dimensional arrays. If it were a vehicle-based model, then
they would be a set of vehicle objects.
Type Route or Next link Vehicles
1 7 11.2
1 4 4.7
2 23 0.3
2 34 9.1
Table 1: Typical lane group state for a first order fluid model.
3 Model interactions
Each of the individual models engaged in the simulation are responsible for managing their
internal states. The interactions between these models are coordinated by the simulator
using the protocol described in this section. This protocol is intended to be compatible with
the Godunov scheme for partial differential equations, but also capable of handling discrete
vehicles. The Godunov scheme, as illustrated by the cell-transmission model, determines
the flow across the boundary between links as the minimum between what the upstream
link ‘wants’ to send (the demand) and what the downstream link can accommodate (the
supply). The method can also be used to solve second-order fluid dynamical models by
generalizing the definitions of demand and supply (Lebacque et al., 2007). Here we use a
similar approach for passing flux packets from an upstream model to a downstream model.
The packet may contain any number of vehicles, along with their state, and tagged with a
state index. For example the contents of Table 1 is a viable flux packet. Packets will contain
either whole vehicle objects or arrays of real numbers, depending on whether the originating
model is vehicle-based or fluid-based. OTM provides basic object types for vehicle-based
and fluid-based state descriptions with translators for converting between them. These can
be used to build new model plugins.
Figure 6: Links are drawn with a dotted rectangle, lane groups with a solid rectangle, and
nodes with a circle.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

The protocol is triggered when the upstream model m requests to send a packet p along
u
a road connection r. Figure 6 shows the elements involved. The road connection r leads to
a set of lane groups D in the downstream link d. The set of road connections that leave
r
link d are denoted with E. The set of links reached by road connections in E is F.
Upon receiving the request from the upstream model to release p along r, the system asks
the downstream model how much space the packet p would occupy in link d, and how much
space is available. This is done by invoking the following methods in the model interface, as
implemented by m .
d
get packet size : (p,r) → |p| ∈ R+ (1)
get max packet size : (p,r) → p¯∈ R+ (2)
These are then used to compute a scaling factor for packet p,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
p¯
α = min 1, (3)
|p|
It is assumed that by multiplying the number of vehicles in the packet by α (uniformly over
all state indices), while keeping fixed all other states and vehicle characteristics, the scaled
packet (αp) will fit in the downstream link. This is true for first order fluid models, and for
the class of generic second order models described in Lebacque et al. (2007) (GSOM class).
If the sending model is vehicle-based, then the packet must be split into two integer-valued
parts, while complying with the space constraint of Eq. (3). In this case, the calculation is
more complicated: each state index is scaled separately by the largest amount that preserves
whole vehicles while not exceeding the value of α from Eq. (3).
In the particular case of a downstream mesoscopic model with vertical queueing, α al-
ways evaluates to 1, since all packets can be accepted without restriction. For second-order
fluid models, such as those in the GSOM class, the maximum packet size depends on the
composition of the packet, in addition to the state of the downstream link. This is the reason
for including p as a parameter in Eq. (2).
It should be noted that it is not necessary that all models share the same ‘norm’; that
is, they need not agree on the size of a packet. They must however return a value |p| such
that αp (as defined above) can be accommodated.
Next, before delivering αp to the downstream model, the system determines the next link
for probabilistically routed vehicles. This is done by sampling the split ratios assigned to
links in F in Figure 6. If the upstream model is fluid-based, then αp is divided into as many
smaller packets as non-zero split ratios exist for the given vehicle type. If it is vehicle-based,
then the each vehicle is assigned a next link with probabilities correseponding to the split
ratios. The resulting collection of vehicles packets is then passed to the downstream model
using the method,
send packets : (P,r) → void (4)
Here P is the collection of packets being sent, and r is the road connection along which they
travel. Upon receiveing the packets, the downstream model must distribute them amongst
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

the lane groups in D . On possible strategy for doing this is to split each packet in P into
r
|D | equal packets. Another is to split them in a way that seeks equilibrium between the
r
lane groups. OTM provides implementations of these two strategies that can be used by
new model plugins.
After lane group assignment, the final step of the process is to translate all of the packets
into the native representation of the receiving model, and incorporate them into the state.
This is done by the downstream model using vehicle classes and translators provided by the
program.
4 Simultaneous requests
Theprevioussectiondescribedtheinteractionbetweenanupstreamandadownstreammodel
when a single vehicle packet is sent between the two. In general however, packets may be
sent simultaneously through a multi-input/multi-output connection. This is the case, for
example, with discrete-time fluid models where all lane groups emit packets at every time
step. In this section we describe the extension of the model coordinator for this case. This is
known in the transportation literature as a “node model”. The purpose of the node model is
to scale the packets that travel through a MIMO node such that they can be acommodated
by the downstream lane groups, while satisfying some criterion such as maximizing flow. We
describe here the particular node model that has been implemented in OTM, which is an
adaptation of the method of Wright et al. (2017) to a network representation consisting of
lane groups and road connections, instead of nodes and links.
Figure 7: Node model.
Figure 7 provides an illustration. A set of packets is requested to be sent from upstream
lane groups in the set G, through road connections in the set R, to downstream lane groups
in the set H. The “node” in the figure has three incoming, or upstream, lane groups {1,
2, 3}, which connect via three road connections {1, 2, 3} to three downstream lane groups
{4, 5, 6}. The figure also shows a graph representation of the connectivity between these
elements. This graph is encoded in “upstream” and “downstream” sets for each element.
The downstream set of lane group 1 is road connection 1, the upstream set of lane group 6
is road connections 1 and 3, etc. These sets are denoted with D , U , D , and U for the
g r r h
upstream and downstream sets of elements in G, R, and H.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

while true {
(NM 0)
break if (stopping criterion)
(NM 1) through (NM 6)
}
The execution of the node model is shown above. With each iteration, the upstream models
send a portion of their packets. The portion is limitted either by upstream demand or
downstream supply, and hence, as with Wright et al. (2017), the algorithm is guaranteed
to complete within a number of iterations not exceeding the number of lane groups. We
confine the description to the simpler case, where the total supply in downstream lane
groups are independent of the composition of the packets being sent to those lanes groups.
This case covers first-order fluid models and most vehicle-based models. This more general
case has been developed by Wright and Horowitz (2017) for graph representations, and will
be developed for OTM in a future publication.
4.1 Node model steps
(NM 0) dg ∈ R+ is the size of the packet emitted by lane group g ∈ G along road connection
r
r ∈ R. This is obtained, as in the SISO case, by invoking Eq. (1) on the unique
receiving model. For each lane group g, we construct the set of road connections with
positive demand:
D+ = {r ∈ D : dg > 0} ∀g ∈ G (5)
g g r
Boolean variables (cid:3)g, (cid:3)r, and (cid:3)h are used to indicate that a lane group or road
connection is “blocked”. A downstream lane group h is blocked if it has zero supply
sh.
(cid:3)h = [sh == 0] ∀h ∈ H (6)
The supply sh is obtained from Eq. (2). This function is expected to return zero
whenever lane group h is full, and thus prevent vehicles from entering. A road con-
nection is blocked only if all of its downstream lane groups are blocked. This reflects
the assumption that packets traveling along road connection r may be placed in any
of the lane groups in D .
r
(cid:3)r = [(cid:3)h] ∀r ∈ R (7)
∀h∈Dr
The variable (cid:3)g is true whenever lane group g is either blocked or empty. An upstream
lane group is blocked whenever any of its exiting road connections is blocked, provided
there is demand for that road connection (Eq. 8). This reflects the FIFO assumption
within the lane group: a single vehicle moving along a blocked road connection will
block the entire upstream lane group. A lane group is empty if its demand has been
delivered, and therefore the set D+ is empty.
g
(cid:3)g = [(cid:3)r] ∨ (cid:2) D+ = ∅ (cid:3) ∀g ∈ G (8)
∃r∈Dg + g
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

(stopping criterion) The computation halts if all upstream lane groups are blocked or empty.
stop if [(cid:3)g] (9)
∀g∈G
(NM 1) For every r ∈ R: Calculate the total demand on each road connection by aggregating
over incoming lane groups.
(cid:88)
dr = dg (10)
r
g∈Ur
Compute the downstream supply available to each road connection, disregarding the
demandsfromotherroadconnections. Thiscalculationinvolvesλr ∈ (0,1], theportion
h
of lane group h that is accessible to road connection r. In Figure 7, λ1 = 0.5 since road
6
connection 1 has access to only one of the two lanes in lane group 6.
(cid:88)
sr = λrsh (11)
h
h∈Dr
Compute the apportionment of the demand on connector r to each of its downstream
lane groups h. This is done in proportion to the available supply.
(cid:26)
0 if sr == 0
αr = ∀ h ∈ D (12)
h λrsh/sr otherwise r
h
(NM 2) For every h ∈ H: Compute the total demand on downtream lane group h as the sum of
demandsonitsincomingroadconnectionsscaledbytheapportionmentfactor(Eq.13).
γh is the percent excess demand on lane group h (Eq. 14).
(cid:88)
dh = αrdr (13)
h
r∈U
h
(cid:18) sh(cid:19)
γh = max 0,1− (14)
dh
(NM 3) For every r ∈ R: Propagate the excess demand factors to the road connectors. The
demand on each road connector must be reduced by the worst-case factor. Note that
this formula will yield γr = 1 for a blocked road connection, since with sh = 0 we have
γh = 1 for all of its downstream lane groups.
(cid:88)
γr = αrγh (15)
h
h∈Dr
(NM 4) For every g ∈ G: Compute the reduction factor for each upstream lane group. Only
road connections with positive demand (r ∈ D+) are considered in this calculation.
g
The (cid:3)g case is included to account for the situation that g is empty, and therefore the
max is undefined. If g is blocked, then both formulas evaluate to 1.
(cid:26) 1 (cid:3)g
γg = (16)
max (γr) !(cid:3)g
r∈Dg +
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

Compute the demand that advances along each road connection exiting lane group g
(Eq. 17), and update the demand that remains (Eq. 18). ∀ r ∈ D+:
g
δg = dg(1−γg) (17)
r r
dg ← γgdg (18)
r r
(NM 5) For every r ∈ R: Calculate the portion of the advancing flow on each road connection.
(cid:88)
δr = δg (19)
r
g∈Ur
(NM 6) For every h ∈ H: Collect the flow entering each downstream lane group and reduce
the downstream supplies.
(cid:88) 1−γh
δh = αrδr (20)
1−γr h
r∈U
h
sh ← sh −δh (21)
Once the algorithm converges, the scaling factors that are the output of the node model
can be computed from the total amount of each packet that has been sent.
5 Models
Models are implemented in OTM as plugins, that is, as relatively small pieces of code that
define the functionality specified by the modeling interface. This interface includes methods
such as Eqs. (1), (2) and (4), as well as other methods that are needed to track performance
measures. Additionally, the model must provide methods for advancing its internal state in
time. That is, it must provide the longitudinal and lateral dynamics. All other functionality
– routing, traffic control, performance metrics, execution, and process parallelization – are
managed by OTM. The main requirement placed on the model is that it must only release
vehicle packets along road connections that are consistent with the routing behavior of the
vehicles. This implies that vehicles must move laterally within a link (from one lane group
to another) in order to reach a valid exiting road connection. In short, the model must
implement a lane-changing strategy.
This section describes implementations of the three canonical examples for microscopic,
mesoscopic, and macroscopic modeling; respectively, Newell’s simplified car following model,
the two-queue model, and the cell-transmission model.
5.1 Newell’s car-following model
The model described here is a discrete-time version of Newell (2002). Each lane group
contains a single first-in-first-out queue of vehicles, numbered starting with the downstream-
most vehicle. The position of the ith vehicle at time t, x (t), is related to the position of the
i
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

(i−1)th vehicle at a previous time,
x (t+∆t) = x (t)+max (cid:0) 0, min (cid:0) δvi , h (t)−δwi , h (t)δf ¯i (cid:1)(cid:1) (22)
i i i i
Here ∆t is model’s simulation time step; δvi, δwi, and δf ¯i are sampled from distributions
whose means correspond to the left and right slopes of the fundamental diagram, and the
capacity (see Figure 4).
δvi ∼ N(v ∆t,σv) (23)
f
δwi ∼ N(w∆t,σw) (24)
δf ¯i ∼ N(f ¯ ∆t,σf) (25)
σv, σw, and σf are user-defined standard deviations. The first term in Eq. (22) applies
to lead vehicles that travel with free-flow speed v . The second term involves h (t), the
F i
headway of the ith vehicle at time t. This is defined, for all vehicles except the first vehicle
in the lane group, as the distance to its leader: h (t) = |x (t) − x (t)|. The first vehicle
i i i−1
however does not have a leader in its lane group, and hence it is possible that its leader
belongs to a different model. Computing the headway for the first vehicle may therefore
involve requesting the position of the upstream-most vehicle in the lead vehicle’s next link.
This is done by calling a method provided by the modeling interface.
get distance to last vehicle : (r) → η ∈ R+ (26)
This measures the distance from the upstream boundary of the link accessed by road con-
nection r to the nearest vehicle in any of the lane groups accessible from r.
The third term in Eq. (22) imposes a capacity constraint.
The lane change model that has been implemented for this model is simple. Vehicles
that enter a link are placed directly into a lane group that connects to their target road
connection, irrespective of whether the road connection they enter by actually connects to
that lane group. In other words they change lanes immediately and without obstruction into
their target lane group. If the target lane group is already full, then the vehicle is placed in
a buffer attached to that lane group, and enters as soon as space becomes available.
5.2 Two-queue model
This mesoscopic model is similar to the one reported in Varaiya (2013). Each lane group is
equipped with two queues. The first is a transit queue, which delays every vehicle entering
the lane group by the free-flow travel time. After leaving the transit queue, the vehicle enters
the waiting queue, which is a FIFO queue, serviced by a Poisson process. See Figure 8.
This model makes use of the three supply-side parameters of Figure 4. The speed limit v¯
¯
is used to calculate the free-flow travel time. The capacity f is the average discharge rate for
the waiting queue. The jam density ρ¯ is used to compute the available supply for incoming
vehicle packets. These packets are rejected whenever the combined number of vehicles in the
transit and waiting queues reaches the maximum value. The lane changing model for the
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

Figure 8: Queueing model.
queuing model is identical to that of the car-following model: an arriving vehicle is placed
immediately into its target lane group unless it is full, in which case the vehicle is held in a
buffer until space becomes available.
5.3 Cell-transmission model
The macroscopic model included with OTM is an adaptation of the cell transmission model
(CTM) of Daganzo (1994), with a lane change strategy that is similar to that of Laval and
Daganzo (2006). Lane groups are divided into cells. Figure 9 shows a single link with three
lane groups. All of the cells in a link are of equal size, which is computed as the largest that
yields an integer number of cells, without exceeding a user-defined maximum cell size. The
simulation time step ∆t must comply with the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy condition, that no
cell can be traversed in one time step by a vehicle traveling at maximum speed.
Figure 9: Lane changing model for the CTM.
Each cell i has up to two lateral neighbors in adjacent lane groups; the inner and outer
lane groups (in(i) and out(i)). The state of a cell i consists of the number of vehicles per
state index s: ni (omitting the time index for convenience).
s
S(cid:96) is the set of all states that can use link (cid:96). The link shown in Figure 9 carries two states:
one represented by a solid blue arrow, which is headed for link 1, and another represented
by an open green arrow, which is headed for link 2. Each lane group carries a map ρg that
returns, for each state, the road connection r that it must use to reach its next link.
ρg : S(cid:96) → R (27)
In Figure 9 we have that ρ1 evaluated on the blue state returns road connection 1, while ρ2
and ρ3 evaluated on the green state return road connection 2. It is a requirement on the
network configuration that this map should return at most one road connection. That is,
for each lane group g, the road connections that leave g must all lead to different links.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

We define the target lane group set for a state s within link (cid:96) as those from which its next
link can be reached. In the figure, the target lane group set for the blue state is {1}, and for
the green state it is {2,3}. Each lane group also carries a map φg indicating the direction in
which a state must change lanes in order to reach its target lane group set.
φg : S(cid:96)(g) → {in,out,none} (28)
Here (cid:96)(g) is the link that contains lane group g, and hence S(cid:96)(g) is the set of states that use
g. φg(s) returns in, out, or none depending on whether the state must change lanes inward,
outward, or not at all to reach its target road connection. Figure 9 illustrates this map.
5.4 Dynamics
Every lane group managed by the fluid-dynamical model emits vehicle packets every ∆t.
These packets are assessed by the OTM node model, which involves calls to the supply
calculation function. Following this, every lane group receives a set of vehicle packets from
its incoming road connections, and proceeds to update its internal state. These three steps
– vehicle packet generation, supply calculation, and state update – are described below.
5.4.1 Vehicle packet generation.
This stage consists of the five internal steps. First, the number of vehicles that change
lanes during the upcoming time step is computed with Eqs. (29) through (31), and used
to compute an intermediate state with Eq. (32). The intermediate state is then used to
evaluate the longitudinal demand, in step Eqs. (33).
Figure 10: Lane change model.
[FP 1] Compute, for each cell, the total number of vehicles performing each of the lane change
maneuvers.
(cid:88)
ni = ni µ ∈ {in,out,stay} (29)
µ s
{s:φg(i)(s)=µ}
16

===== PAGE 17 =====

Here, g(i) is the lane group for cell i, and therefore {s : φg(i)(s) = µ} is the set of states
that perform maneuver µ in cell i.
[FP 2] Compute for all cells i the total number of vehicles in the cell.
(cid:88)
ni = ni +ni +ni = ni ∀ cells i (30)
in out stay s
s
[FP 3] Compute the scaling factor for all cells. ξi ∈ [0,1] is a supply apportionment factor for
lane change movements, analogous to w for longitudinal movements. Hence the space
available in cell i for vehicles changing lanes is ξi(n¯i −ni), where n¯i is the maximum
occupancy. As illustrated in Figure 10, the total number of vehicles entering cell i is
nout(i) +nin(i), and the scaling factor βi is,
in out
(cid:32) (cid:33)
ξi(n¯i −ni)
βi = min 1 , (31)
nout(i) +nin(i)
in out
[FP 4] Apply the scaling factors to the lane change demands and execute the maneuvers. This
results in an intermediate state nˆi which represents the number of vehicles for state s
s
after the lane changes have completed, but before vehicles have moved forward.
 (cid:0) (cid:1) 
1−βin(i) ni if φi(s) = in
 s 
(cid:0) (cid:1)
nˆi = 1−βout(i) ni if φi(s) = out (32)
s s
 ni if φi(s) = none 
s
(cid:26) nout(i) if φout(i)(s) = in (cid:27)
+ βi s
0 otherwise
(cid:26) nin(i) if φin(i)(s) = out (cid:27)
+ βi s
0 otherwise
[FP 5] Compute the demand generated by each lane group on each of its outgoing road con-
nections. This demand depends on the number of vehicles in its downstream-most cell.
Denote with θ(g) a map that returns the downstream-most cell for lane group g (see
Figure 9).
(cid:26) min(vθ(g) nθ(g),f ¯θ(g)) if ρg(s) = r
dg = x (33)
rs 0 otherwise
Here dg is the demand for state s generated by lane group g on road connection r. dg
rs rs
is zero if s does not use r. Otherwise it is as prescribed by the CTM. vθ(g) and f ¯θ(g)
are the normalized free-flow speed and capacity for the downstream-most cell of lane
group g. The set of dg values over all states s constitutes the flux packet that lane
rs
group g emits on road connection r.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====

5.4.2 Supply calculation.
The space available in lane group g to receive packets from upstream road connections is a
¯
functionofthestateinitsupstream-mostcell. Denotethiscellwithθ(g)(showninFigure9).
sg = wθ¯(g)(n¯θ¯(g) −nθ¯(g)) (34)
Here
n¯θ¯(g)
and
wθ¯(g)
are parameters of the upstream-most cell representing the jam density
and congestion wave propagation speed.
5.4.3 State update.
Following the completion of the node model, reduced packets are passed between the lane
groups. These are then translated into the macroscopic representation, and consolidated into
two packets per lane groups – one entering and one leaving. The content of the upstream and
downstream packets for lane group g is the total number of vehicles per state s: ng,up and
s
ng,dn. The the densities per cell and state can then be updated using the law of conservation
s
of vehicles. The incoming flow for the upstream-most cell is ng,up, the outgoing flow for the
s
downstream-most cell is ng,dn. The flows across internal cell boundaries are given by the
s
standard CTM formulas.
All models must respond to simulator requests for the position of the upstream-most
vehicle in a lane group. The CTM does this based on the supply function of the upstream-
most cell in the lane group. By assuming that density concentrates toward the downstream
part of the cell, the distance from the upstream edge to the last vehicle is (cid:96)(ρ¯−ρ)/ρ¯, where
(cid:96) is the length of the cell, ρ¯ is the jam density, and ρ is the current density.
6 Control elements
We have thus far described the simulation of the hybrid open-loop traffic dynamics. We
now describe how this dynamics can be influenced by a feedback algorithm, or a controller.
Controllers are implemented in OTM as plugins, similarly to models. They do not interact
directly with the traffic models, but instead through sensors and actuators. A sensor is any
element that extracts information from the models and provides it to the controller. An
actuator delivers the control command from the controller to the models. OTM provides a
number of sensors and actuators that can be used by the modeler to construct the control
infrastructure. Sensors and actuators are model agnostic: they operate using methods from
the modeling interface, and are not concerned with the implementation details of those
methods. Thus, the traffic models used in a scenario can be changed without modifying the
control structures.
Each controller can register with one or more sensors and one or more actuators. An
actuator however can only be assigned to a single controller. Each controller is prescribed a
time step by the modeler. This time step need not be equal to (or a multiple of) the time
stepsoftheunderlyingmodels. Ateverytimestep, thecontrollerwillreadthemeasurements
18

===== PAGE 19 =====

from its sensors, update its commands, and then transmit the commands to its actuators.
Sensors and actuators have their own time steps, and again these are independent from the
timestepsofthecontrollersandmodels. Sensorsuseinterfacemethodstoextractinformation
from the models at each sensor time step. For example, the fixed local sensor method uses
the get total vehicles in lanegroup(lg). OTM currently provides the following basic
sensors,
• Fixed local sensor. This sensor is attached to the pavement, and can be used to extract
density, flow, and speed information for a particular cross section.
• Fixed lane group sensor. This sensor is attached to a lane group, and can be used to
obtain the total number of vehicles and their speeds.
• Probe. This sensor is attached to a vehicle and can be used to measure its speed and
local environment.
The functionality required for the probe sensor is implemented in OTM’s basic vehicle class.
This class can be extended for use in any vehicle-based model. When a probe vehicle enters
a fluid-based model, OTM automatically creates a ‘’virtual vehicle’, which it tracks through
the fluid network using the local speed provided by the model.
In addition to these, there are also methods for querying static information about the sce-
nario. This includes information about past and future demands and split ratios, controller
states, and geometric information of the links and lane groups.
These are the actuators that are currently available in OTM:
• Road connection blocking actuator. This actuator can be used to open and close road
connections, and thus to mimick traffic signals.
• Variable speed limit. This actuator is used to change the speed limit of the link and
its lane groups.
• Router. Used to change the route of a routed vehicle type.
• Demand modifier. Alter the profile of demand intensity for a source and vehicle type.
• Split ratio actuator. Alter the profile of split ratios for a given vehicle type at a
junction.
In contrast to sensors, the implementation of these actuators does not make use of the mod-
eling interface, but rather act by modifying the inputs to the models (e.g. road parameters).
7 Experiments
Here we apply the OTM framework to a simple linear network with two models m and
A
m . This is meant only to demonstrate the translation of vehicle states across a modeling
B
19

===== PAGE 20 =====

Figure 11: Experimental setup.
interface. It does not exercise other features of the program, such as vehicle types, lane
changing, the node model, and control structures. These are left for a future publication.
Figure 11 shows the setup. The links are all of length 500 meters. They share per-lane
characteristics: the capacity is 1,000 veh/hr/lane, jam density is 100 veh/km/lane, and the
free-flow speed is 100 km/hour. Links 0 through 4 have two lanes, and hence their flow and
holding capacities are 2,000 veh/hr and 100 vehicles respectively. Link 5 has half of these
values (1,000 veh/hour and 50 vehicles).
Links 0, 1, and 2 are managed by m ; links 3, 4, and 5 by m . A source of 1500
A B
veh/hr is applied upstream of link 0. This causes congestion to accummulate at link 5. This
congestionpropagatesupstreamoverthemodelinginterface, anddissipatesafterthedemand
is removed.
Figure 12: m =macro, m =meso.
A B
Figure 12 shows the result when m is a macroscopic model and m is mesoscopic.
A B
Vehicles immediately begin to queue in link 5. The number of vehicles in link 5 reaches
50 after about 400 seconds, and then the queue spills into link 4. The queue reaches the
model boundary at around 1,750 seconds and propagates into the macroscopic model. The
queueing density and speed in the macroscopic portion are 55 vehicles and 9.09 km/hr,
according to the hydrodynamic theory. Notice that the congested density in the fluid model
is significantly lower than in the mesoscopic model (55 vehicle versus 100 vehicles). As a
consequence, the speed of propagation of congestion is higher. After the demand is removed
20

===== PAGE 21 =====

(at 2,500 second) the congestion dissipates, again at a faster pace in the macroscopic model
than in the mesoscopic model.
Figure 13 shows the result when m is macroscopic and m is microscopic. For the
A B
microscopic model, the capacity reduction of link 5 is applied throughout its length, and not
only at the downstream edge of the link, as with the macroscopic and mesoscopic models.
This can be seen in Figure 13 as vehicles increase their spacing when they enter link 5. This
causes congestion to form more quickly than in the previous case. The congestion wave
reaches the model boundary after approximately 540 seconds. Measuring from the plot, the
speed of propagation of congestion in the microscopic region is approximately 8.4 km/hour,
which is 8% slower than in the fluid model, and faster than in the mesoscopic model. The
queueing density in the microscopic model is about 34 vehicles in 500 meters. The congestion
reaches the upstream boundary of the segment at around 1,400 sec. After that, the demand
is turned off and congestion dissipates.
Figures 13, 14, and 15 show other combinations of the three model types.
Figure 13: m =macro, m =micro.
A B
8 Conclusion
The goal of this work has been to develop a traffic simulation platform that is capable of
running a variety of models, such as car-following, queueing, and fluid-based models. The
approach has two main components.
1. A network description that bridges the single-pipe graphs of macroscopic models and
the lane-by-lane representations of micropscopic models. Road connections are used to
construct lane groups. The lanes within a lane group are assumed to be synchronized
in speed, and hence each lane group is assigned one instantiation of the ‘longitudinal
dynamics’. This corresponds to a lane of vehicles for a microscopic model, a pair of
queues for a mesoscopic model, and a differential equation for a macroscopic model.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====

Figure 14: m =meso, m =micro.
A B
Figure 15: m =micro, m =macro.
A B
The granularity of the representation can be controlled by adding or removing road
connections. Single-pipe and lane-by-lane are the two extreme cases.
2. A protocol for coordinating models that operate on this network description. The
protocol uses a ‘model interface’ to negotiate the passage of flux packets from one
link to another. The protocol is similar to the Godunov scheme for partial differential
equations, with a simple extension to vehicle-based models.
Apart from the dynamical model, the complete specification of a traffic scenario also includes
thedemandsandthecontrolalgorithms. Thepaperdescribesademandspecificationthathas
multiple vehicles types (multi-commodity) and also allows for routed and probabilistic flows.
The control structure has sensors and actuators, which provide communication between the
models and the controllers.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====

Open Traffic Models (OTM) is an implementation of this scheme. The software includes
the three example models of the paper. The control and modeling interfaces allow for
algorithms to be implemented as plugins. OTM is an open-source software, and it can be
found at https://github.com/ggomes/otm-sim.
References
Aimsun. https://www.aimsun.com/, 2019. [Online; accessed January 2019].
E. Bourrel and J.B. Lesort. Mixing micro and macro representations of traffic flow: A hybrid
model based on the LWR theory. In 82th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research
Board, 2003.
W. Burghout, H. Koutsopoulos, and I. Andr´easson. Hybrid mesoscopic–microscopic traf-
fic simulation. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board, 1934:218–225, 2005.
R. Chandler, R. Herman, and E. Montroll. Traffic dynamics: Studies in car following.
Operations Research, 6, 1958.
C. Daganzo. The cell transmission model a dynamic representation of highway traffic con-
sistent with the hydrodynamic theory. Transportation Research Part B, 28B(4):269–287,
1994.
B. Greenshields. A study of highway capacity. Proceedings Highway Research Record, 14,
1935.
Systems Division ITT Industries, Inc. CORSIM User’s Guide, CORSIM Reference Manual,
Version 6.0, May 2005. Prepared for Federal Highway Administration under contract
number: DTFH61-01-C-00005.
P. Korˇcek, L. Sekanina, and O. Fuˇcik. Cellular automata based traffic simulation accelerated
on GPU. page 395–402, 2011.
D. Krajzewicz, M. Bonert, and P. Wagner. The open source traffic simulation package
SUMO. In RoboCup 2006, 2006.
J. Laval and C. Daganzo. Lane-changing in traffic streams. Transportation Research Part
B, 40:251–264, 2006.
J.P Lebacque, S. Mammar, and H. Haj-Salem. Generic second order traffic flow modelling.
17th International Symposium on Transportation and Traffic Theory, 2007.
L. Leclercq. Hybrid approaches to the solutions of the Lighthill–Whitham–Richards model.
Transportation Research Part B, 41:701–709, 2007.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====

E. Lieberman. Brief history of traffic simulation. Traffic and Transportation Simulation -
Looking Back and Looking Ahead: Celebrating 50 Years of Traffic Flow Theory, a Work-
shop, pages 17–29, 2004.
M.J.LighthillandG.B.Whitham. OnkinematicwavesII.Atheoryoftrafficonlongcrowded
roads. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 229:317–345, 1955.
K. Nagel and M. Schreckenberg. A cellular automaton model for freeway traffic. Journal de
Physique I, 2(12):2221–2229, 1992.
G. Newell. A simplified car-following theory: A lower order model. Transportation Research
Part B, 36:195–205, 2002.
P. Richards. Shock waves on the highway. Operations Research, 4:42–51, 1956.
F. van Wageningen-Kessels, H. van Lint, K. Vuik, and S. Hoogendoorn. Genealogy of traffic
flow models. EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics, 4(4):445–473, 2015.
P. Varaiya. Max pressure control of a network of signalized intersections. Transportation
Research Part C, 36:177–195, 2013.
M. Wright, G. Gomes, R. Horowitz, and A. Kurzhanskiy. On node models for high-
dimensional road networks. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 105:212–234,
2017.
M.A. Wright and R. Horowitz. Generic second-order macroscopic traffic node model
for general multi-input multi-output road junctions via a dynamic system approach.
arXiv:1707.09346 [cs, math], July 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.09346.
X. Zhou and J. Taylor. DTALite: A queue-based mesoscopic traffic simulator for fast model
evaluation and calibration. Cogent Engineering, 1(1), 2014.
24
