===== PAGE 1 =====

volume is high) (9). In addition, drivers’ lane-changing behavior has
a direct inﬂuence on traffic safety.
Despite its great signiﬁcance, lane changing has not been studied
nearly as extensively as longitudinal acceleration and deceleration
behavior. One reason is the scarcity of reliable data ( 10, 11). To
measure lane changes, cross-sectional data from detectors are not
sufficient and therefore only a few empirical studies about lane-
changing rates as a function of traffic ﬂow or density are available.
Sparmann (12) investigated lane-changing rates on a German two-
lane autobahn. Data for a British motorway were presented by Yousif
and Hunt (13). Recent progress in video tracking methods, however,
allows for a collection of high-quality trajectory data from aerial
observations (14, 15). These two-dimensional data will become more
and more available in the future and will allow for a more profound
understanding of the microscopic lane-changing processes.
The modeling of lane changes is typically considered a multistep
process. On a strategic level, the driver knows about his or her route
in a network, which influences the lane choice, for example, with
regard to lane blockages, on-ramps, off-ramps, or other mandatory
merges (16). In the tactical stage, an intended lane change is prepared
and initiated by advance acceleration or deceleration by the driver
and possibly by cooperation of drivers in the target lane (4). Finally,
in the operational stage, one determines if an immediate lane change
is both safe and desirable (17 ). This choice is typically modeled by
the use of gap-acceptance models, in which drivers compare the avail-
able gaps to the smallest acceptable gap, or the critical gap. Critical
gaps depend in general on the relative speed of the subject vehicle
with respect to those of the lead and the lag vehicles in the adjacent
lane and on the type of lane change (18). Most lane-changing mod-
els in the literature classify lane changes as either mandatory or
discretionary (17–22). Although mandatory changes are performed
for strategic reasons, the driver’s motivation for discretionary lane
changes is a perceived improvement of the driving conditions in the
target lane compared with the actual situation.
A lane-changing model for microscopic car-following models is
presented that describes the rational decision to change lanes and
therefore deals only with the operational decision process. When a
lane change is considered, it is assumed that a driver makes a trade-off
between the expected own advantage and the disadvantage imposed
on other drivers. In particular, the current model includes the follower
in the target lane in the decision process. For a driver considering
a lane change, the subjective utility of a change increases with the
gap to the new leader in the target lane. However, if the velocity of
this leader is lower, it may be favorable to stay in the present lane
despite the smaller gap. A criterion for the utility including both sit-
uations is the difference in the accelerations after and before the lane
change. In this work, therefore, it is proposed that the utility function
be consideration of the difference in vehicle accelerations (or deceler-
ations) after a lane change, calculated with an underlying microscopic
Institute for Transport and Economics, Technische Universität Dresden, Andreas-
Schubert-Strasse 23, D-01062 Dresden, Germany. Corresponding author: 
A. Kesting, kesting@vwi.tu-dresden.de.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
No. 1999,Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington,
D.C., 2007, pp. 86–94.
DOI: 10.3141/1999-10
86
General Lane-Changing Model MOBIL 
for Car-Following Models
Arne Kesting, Martin Treiber, and Dirk Helbing
A general model (minimizing overall braking induced by lane change,
MOBIL) is proposed to derive lane-changing rules for discretionary and
mandatory lane changes for a wide class of car-following models. Both
the utility of a given lane and the risk associated with lane changes are
determined in terms of longitudinal accelerations calculated with micro-
scopic traffic models. This determination allows for the formulation of
compact and general safety and incentive criteria for both symmetric
and asymmetric passing rules. Moreover, anticipative elements and the
crucial inﬂuence of velocity differences of these car-following models are
automatically transferred to the lane-changing rules. Although the safety
criterion prevents critical lane changes and collisions, the incentive crite-
rion takes into account the advantages and disadvantages of other drivers
associated with a lane change via the “politeness factor.” The parameter
allows one to vary the motivation for lane changing from purely egois-
tic to more cooperative driving behavior. This novel feature allows one
ﬁrst to prevent lane changes for a marginal advantage if they obstruct
other drivers and second to let an aggressive driver induce the lane change
of a slower driver ahead in order to no longer be obstructed. This phe-
nomenon is common for asymmetric passing rules with a dedicated lane
for passing. The model is applied to traffic simulations of cars and trucks
with the intelligent driver model as the underlying car-following model.
An open system with an on-ramp is studied, and the resulting lane-
changing rate is investigated as a function of the spatial coordinate as
well as a function of traffic density.
In the past, single-lane car-following models have been successfully
applied to describe traffic dynamics ( 1, 2). Particularly collective
phenomena such as traffic instabilities and the spatiotemporal dynam-
ics of congested traffic can be well understood within the scope of
single-lane traffic models. But real traffic consists of different types
of vehicles, such as cars and trucks. Therefore, a realistic descrip-
tion of heterogeneous traffic streams is only possible within a multi-
lane modeling framework allowing faster vehicles to improve their
driving condition by passing slower vehicles. Hence, freeway lane
changing has recently received increased attention (3–8). Moreover,
since lane-changing maneuvers often act as initial perturbations,
it is crucial to understand their impact on the capacity, stability, and
breakdown of traffic ﬂows. Particularly near bottleneck sections such
as on-ramps and off-ramps, lane changing is often a signiﬁcant ingre-
dient in triggering a traffic breakdown (provided that the traffic

===== PAGE 2 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 87
longitudinal traffic model. The higher the acceleration in a given lane,
the nearer it is to the ideal acceleration on an empty road and the more
attractive it is to the driver. Therefore, the basic idea of the proposed
lane-changing model is to formulate the anticipated advantages and
disadvantages of a prospective lane change in terms of single-lane
accelerations.
Compared with the explicit lane-changing model, the formulation
in terms of accelerations of a longitudinal model has several advan-
tages. First, assessment of the traffic situation is transferred to the
acceleration function of the car-following model, which allows for
a compact and general model formulation with only a small number
of additional parameters. In contrast to the classical gap-acceptance
approach, critical gaps are not taken into account explicitly. Second,
it is ensured that both longitudinal and lane-changing models are
consistent with each other. For example, if the longitudinal model is
collision-free, the combined models will be accident-free as well.
Third, any complexity of the longitudinal model such as anticipation
is transferred automatically to a similarly complex lane-changing
model. Finally, the braking deceleration imposed on the new fol-
lower in the target lane to avoid accidents is an obvious measure for
safety. Thus, safety and motivational criteria can be formulated in a
uniﬁed way.
Apart from using accelerations as utility functions, the main novel
feature of the proposed lane-changing model consists in taking into
account the advantage or disadvantage of the followers via a “polite-
ness parameter.” By adjusting this parameter, the motivations for
lane changing can be varied from purely egoistic to more altruistic
behavior. In particular, there exists a value at which lane changes are
carried out only if they increase the combined accelerations of the
lane-changing driver and all affected neighbors. This strategy can be
paraphrased by the phrase “minimizing overall braking induced by
lane changes” (MOBIL). In the following, the concept discussed here
is referred to with this acronym regardless of the value of the polite-
ness parameter. All lane-changing models cited earlier assume egoistic
behavior. By the politeness factor, two common lane-changing pat-
terns can be modeled. First, most drivers do not change lanes for a
marginal advantage if this change obstructs other drivers in addition
to a common safety condition. Second, in countries with asymmetric
lane-changing rules, aggressive drivers may induce the lane change
of a slower driver in front of them to the faster lane, which is ded-
icated to passing, so that the slower lane will no longer be obstructed.
In the following section, the lane-changing model MOBIL is for-
mulated for both symmetric (U.S.) and asymmetric (European) pass-
ing rules. Then the MOBIL rules are applied and multilane traffic is
simulated in combination with the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM)
as the underlying longitudinal car-following model (23).
LANE-CHANGING MODEL MOBIL
Most time-continuous microscopic single-lane traffic models describe
the motion of single driver–vehicle units α as a function of their own
velocity v
α , the bumper-to-bumper distance sα to the front vehicle
(α− 1) and the relative velocity Δvα = vα − vα− 1. The acceleration of
these car-following models is of the following general form:
Some examples are the model of Gipps ( 17), the optimal velocity
model (24), the IDM (23), or the velocity difference model (25, 26).
a dv
dt as v vα
α
αα α≡= ( ),, ( ) Δ 1
Moreover, a generalization to models taking into account more than
one predecessor (27–29) or to models with explicit reaction time is
straightforward.
A speciﬁc lane change (e.g., from the center lane to the median
lane as shown in Figure 1) depends generally on the two following
vehicles in the current and the target lanes, respectively. To formu-
late the lane-changing criteria, the following notation is used: for a
vehicle c considering a lane change, the successive vehicles in the
target and current lanes are represented by n and o, respectively. The
acceleration a
c denotes the acceleration of vehicle c on the actual
lane, and ãc refers to the situation in the target lane, that is, to the new
acceleration of vehicle c in the target lane. Likewise, ão and ãn denote
the acceleration of the old and new followers after the lane change of
vehicle c.
Safety Criterion
As with other lane-changing models ( 17 ), a distinction is made
between an incentive to change lanes and safety constraints. The safety
criterion checks the possibility of executing a lane change (gap accep-
tance) by considering the effect on the upstream vehicle in the target
lane. Formulated in terms of longitudinal accelerations, this safety
criterion guarantees that after the lane change, the deceleration of the
successor ã
n in the target lane does not exceed a given safe limit bsafe:
Although formulated as a simple inequality, this condition con-
tains all the information provided by the longitudinal car-following
model via the acceleration ã
n (t) typically depending on the gap, the
velocity, and eventually the approaching rate (see Equation 1). In
particular, if the longitudinal model has a built-in sensitivity with
respect to velocity differences, this essential dependence is transferred
to the lane-changing decisions. In this way, larger gaps between the
following vehicle in the target lane and the own position are required
to satisfy the safety constraint if the following vehicle is faster than
the own speed. In contrast, lower values for the gap are allowed
if the following vehicle is slower. Compared with conventional gap-
acceptance models this approach depends on gaps only indirectly,
via the dependence on the longitudinal acceleration. The assess-
ment of the situation in terms of accelerations allows for the compact
formulation.
Moreover, by formulating the criterion in terms of safe braking
decelerations of the longitudinal model, crashes due to lane changes
are automatically excluded. For realistic longitudinal models, b
safe
should be well below the maximum possible deceleration bmax,
which is about 9 m/s2 on dry road surfaces. It should be noted that
the maximum safe deceleration bsafe prevents accidents even in the
ãbn ≥− safe ()2
ac
ac
n
co
˜
FIGURE 1 Nearest neighbors of central
vehicle c considering lane change to the left
(new and old successors are denoted n and o,
respectively; accelerations after possible
change are denoted with a tilde).

===== PAGE 3 =====

case of totally selfish drivers as long as its value is not greater
than the maximum possible deceleration bmax of the underlying
longitudinal model.
Increasing the value for bsafe generally leads to stronger perturba-
tions because of individual lane changes. But the braking reaction
of the follower in the target lane is always limited by the value of
b
safe. This feature is relevant in traffic simulations because of the fact
that performing a lane change implies a discontinuous change in the
input parameters for the acceleration function for the new follower.
Incentive Criterion for Symmetric 
Lane-Changing Rules
The incentive criterion typically determines if a lane change improves
the individual local traffic situation of a driver. In the current
model, the incentive criterion is generalized to include the immedi-
ately affected neighbors as well. The politeness factor p determines
to which degree these vehicles inﬂuence the lane-changing decision.
For symmetric overtaking rules, the differences between the lanes
are neglected and the following incentive condition is proposed for
a lane-changing decision of the driver of vehicle c:
The ﬁrst two terms denote the advantage (utility) of a possible
lane change for the driver where ã
c refers to the new acceleration for
vehicle c after a prospective lane change. The considered lane change
is favorable if the driver can accelerate more, that is, go faster in the
new lane. The third term with the politeness factor p is the main inno-
vation in this model. It denotes the total advantage (acceleration gain
or loss, if negative) of the two immediately affected neighbors,
weighted with p. Finally, the switching threshold Δa
th on the right-
hand side of Equation 3 models a certain inertia and prevents lane
changes if the overall advantage is only marginal compared with a
“keep lane” directive. In summary, the incentive criterion is fulﬁlled
if the own advantage (acceleration gain) is higher than the weighted
sum of the disadvantages (acceleration losses) of the new and old
successors and the threshold Δa
th. [In fact, the incentive criterion in
Equation 3 automatically includes a safety component for the lane-
changing vehicle. Even for the most aggressive parameter settings
(p = 0 and Δa
th = 0) lanes are only changed if, in the new lane, the
acceleration is higher or, equivalently, the necessary braking decel-
eration is lower than in the current lane. Consequently, Criterion 3
can only be true if the new lane is safer than the old lane. The only
requirement for the acceleration model is that, in dangerous situa-
tions, it should return a braking deceleration that increases as the
situation becomes more critical, a condition that any reasonable
acceleration model should fulﬁll.] It should be noted that the thresh-
old Δ a
th influences the lane-changing behavior globally, whereas
the politeness parameter affects the local lane-changing behavior
depending on the involved neighbors.
The generalization to traffic in more than two lanes per direction
is straightforward. If, for a vehicle in a center lane, the incentive cri-
terion is satisﬁed for both neighboring lanes, the change is performed
to the lane in which the incentive is larger.
Since the disadvantages of other drivers and the own advantage
are balanced via the politeness factor p, the lane-changing model
contains typical strategic features of classical game theory. The value
of p can be interpreted as the degree of altruism. It can vary from
ãap ãa ãacc nn oo−+ − + −
driver new follower o
123 123
lld follower
th123
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎟
>Δ a ()3
88 Transportation Research Record 1999
p = 0 (for selﬁsh lane-hoppers) to p > 1 for altruistic drivers who do
not change if that would cause the overall traffic situation to deteri-
orate considering followers, whereas they would perform even dis-
advantageous lane changes if that change improved the situation of
the followers sufficiently. By setting p < 0, even malicious drivers
could be modeled, who accept own disadvantages in order to thwart
others. In the special case p = 1 and Δa
th = 0, the incentive criterion
simpliﬁes to
Thus, lane changes are only performed when they increase the
sum of accelerations of all involved vehicles, which corresponds to
the concept of minimizing overall braking induced by lane changes
(MOBIL) in the ideal sense. In this case, no additional safety con-
straint is needed since a braking maneuver in order to avoid an acci-
dent would be automatically excluded by Equation 4 as long as the
advantage in terms of the acceleration is lower than the disadvantage
in terms of the braking deceleration. Therefore, the ideal MOBIL
strategy corresponding to p = 1 has no free parameters and might
therefore be considered as a minimal model for lane-changing deci-
sions. Later, the rate of lane changes (per kilometer and hour), which
is primarily determined by the politeness factor p, is investigated.
Incentive Criterion for Asymmetric 
Passing Rules
In most European countries, the driving rules for lane usage are
restricted by legislation. An asymmetric lane-changing criterion for
two-lane freeways is now formulated and it is assumed, without
loss of generality, that the right lane is the default lane (i.e., a “keep
right” directive is implemented). A reformulation for left-oriented
traffic describing, for example, traffic rules in the United Kingdom
as well as generalizations to more than two lanes is straightforward.
Speciﬁcally, the following European traffic rules are assumed:
1. Passing rule. Passing in the right-hand lane is forbidden unless
traffic ﬂow is congested, in which case the symmetric rule (Equa-
tion 3) applies. Any vehicle driving at a velocity below some suitably
specified velocity v
crit is treated as driving in bound or congested
traffic (e.g., vcrit = 60 km/h).
2. Lane usage rule. The right lane is the default lane. The left lane
should only be used for the purpose of overtaking.
The passing rule was implemented by replacing the longitudinal
dynamics in the right-hand lane by the following condition:
where ãc corresponds to the acceleration in the left lane and v~
lead
denotes the velocity of the front vehicle in the left-hand lane. The
passing rule inﬂuences the acceleration in the right-hand lane only
if (a) there is no congested traffic (v~
lead > vcrit), (b) the front vehicle
on the left-hand lane is slower (vc > v~
lead), and (c) the acceleration ãc
for following this vehicle would be lower than the single-lane accel-
eration ac in the actual situation. It should be noted that the condi-
tion vc > v~
lead prevents vehicles in the right-hand lane from braking
whenever they are passed.
The keep-right directive of the lane usage rule is implemented by
a constant bias Δabias in addition to the threshold Δath. Furthermore,
a= a , ã v >v >v
ac
cc c
c
eur lead critmin if
otherwi
( ) %
sse{ ()5
ã+ ã+ ã> a+ a+ acno cno ()4

===== PAGE 4 =====

Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 89
the disadvantage of the successor in the right lane in Equation 3 is
neglected because the left lane has priority. Explicitly speaking, the
resulting asymmetric incentive criterion for lane changes from left
(L) to right (R) reads
Moreover, the incentive criterion for a lane change from right to left
is given by
Again, the quantities with a tilde refer to the new situation after a
prospective lane change. Although the parameter Δ a
bias is small,
it clearly has to be larger than the threshold Δ ath. Otherwise, the
switching threshold would prevent changes to the right-hand lane
even on an empty road.
Neglecting the follower in the right-hand lane leads to a different
interpretation of the politeness parameter p than that for the sym-
metric rule. Via the politeness factor p, a driver in the right lane con-
sidering a lane change to the left takes into account the disadvantage
measured in terms of the braking deceleration for the approaching
vehicle in the target lane. This consideration can prevent the lane
change even if the lane change is not critical, which is ensured by
the safety criterion (Equation 2). This feature of the MOBIL lane-
changing model reﬂects realistically the far-seeing and anticipative
driving behavior commonly observed with asymmetric passing rules.
Furthermore, taking into account only the follower of the faster (left)
lane via the politeness factor p applies a selective dynamic pressure
on slow vehicles driving in the left lane in order to let fast vehicles
pass in the left lane, which is a frequently observed behavior on Euro-
pean freeways, particularly on German freeways with their broad
distribution of desired velocities. It should be noted that the safety
criterion prevents a critical lane change to the slower lane.
APPLICATION TO MULTILANE 
TRAFFIC SIMULATIONS
The MOBIL concept is now applied to simulate two-lane freeway
traffic with an on-ramp as merging zone. Since the rules are formu-
lated in a model-independent way based on longitudinal accelerations,
the underlying microscopic traffic model has to be speciﬁed. In the
following, the IDM ( 23) is used, which is a simple car-following
model with descriptive parameters (30).
The IDM acceleration v˙ of each vehicle α is a continuous function
of the velocity v
α , the net distance gap sα , and the velocity difference
Δvα to the leading vehicle:
This expression is a superposition of the acceleration v˙free (v) =
a[1 − (v/v0)4] on a free road and the braking deceleration v˙int (s, v,Δv) =
−a(s*/s)2, when vehicle α comes too close to the vehicle ahead. The
deceleration term depends on the ratio between the effective desired
minimum gap and the actual gap s
α :
sv , v = s + v T + v
ab
*
2
0Δ( ) ()9
&v= a v
v
sv , v
s
α
α αα
α
1
*
0
4
2
− ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ − ( )⎛
⎝
⎜⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟⎟
⎡
⎣
⎢ Δ
⎢⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
()8
RL ã a + p ã a > a + acc nn→− − ( ):
eur
th biasΔΔ ()7
LR ã a + p ã a > a acc o o→− − ( ) −:
eur
th biasΔΔ ()6
The minimum distance s0 in congested traffic is signiﬁcant for low
velocities only. The main contribution in stationary traffic is the term
vT, which corresponds to following the leading vehicle with a con-
stant safety time gap T. The last term is only active in nonstationary
traffic and implements an intelligent driving behavior including a
braking strategy that, in nearly all situations, limits braking decel-
erations to the comfortable deceleration b. The IDM guarantees
crash-free driving.
Lane-changing behavior depends not only on the lane-changing
and car-following model but also on the heterogeneity of the driver–
vehicle units. Particularly for identical driver–vehicle units, a station-
ary state would soon be reached. To avoid this artifact, heterogeneity
was introduced by implementing two types of vehicles. The slower
trucks differ in their reduced desired velocity v
0 = 80 km/h compared
with the faster cars (v0 = 120 km/h). In addition to the different desired
velocities for the vehicle type, the desired velocity was also uniformly
distributed with a variation of ±20% for each single vehicle in order
to increase the degree of heterogeneity. For these simulations, the
following IDM parameters were used: the time gap is set to T = 1.2 s,
the maximum acceleration to a = 1.5 m/s
2, the desired deceleration
to b = 2 m/s2, and the minimum distance to s0 = 2 m. Furthermore,
the vehicle length is assumed to be 4 m for cars and 12 m for trucks.
In addition, a truck fraction of 20% was assumed.
The values of the MOBIL parameters used in the simulations are
as follows:
Parameter Value
Politeness factor p 0 ... 1
Changing threshold Δath 0.1 m/s2
Maximum safe deceleration bsafe 4 m/s2
Bias for right lane Δabias 0.3 m/s2
The politeness parameter p of the incentive criterion mainly deter-
mines the lane-changing rate. The changing threshold Δath prevents
lane changes of marginal advantage. For p < 1, the maximum safe
deceleration bsafe serves as an additional safety criterion. The value of
bsafe is chosen considerably below the physically possible maximum
deceleration of about 9 m/s2 on dry roads. In the case of asymmetric
(European) lane-changing rules, the additional bias Δabias models a
preferred lane usage of the default lane. The values are used in the
simulations in combination with the IDM. It should be noted that
lane-changing properties and consequently the values depend on the
respective longitudinal traffic model.
The incentive criterion is evaluated in each numerical update step
in the simulation; that is, the drivers continuously check their incen-
tives. If a lane change is favorable and safe, the lane change is per-
formed immediately and the transition from the current lane to the
target lane is neglected. It should be noted that the acceleration will
be discontinuous for the considered vehicle and also for the old and
new successors. However, since the velocity is given by integrating
the acceleration, the velocities of all vehicles (and the accelerations
of all other vehicles not directly involved in the lane change) remain
continuous. The simulation results were checked for the different
numerical update steps Δt = 0.25, 0.1, and 0.01s and only a marginal
quantitative difference with respect to lane-changing rates was found.
Furthermore, the multilane model combination of IDM and MOBIL
is mathematically consistent in the sense that the numerical results
for a limited simulation period converge in the limit Δt → 0 s. For the
following simulations, an explicit numerical update of Δt = 0.25 s
was used.
When MOBIL accelerations for the old and new followers are
evaluated, one has, in principle, the freedom to evaluate the acceler-
ations by using the own model parameter set or that of the respective

===== PAGE 5 =====

90 Transportation Research Record 1999
successors. Clearly, using the driving parameters of the followers
is in line with the reasoning behind MOBIL, although they are not
directly observable by the driver initiating a lane change. However,
strong clues are given to the driver both by the vehicle type (truck,
family car, sports car) and by the past driving style. Therefore, all
MOBIL accelerations were evaluated with the model parameters of
the respective successors.
Spatial Distribution of Lane-Changing Rate
The proposed lane-changing model is now applied to the simulations
of discretionary and mandatory lane changes. To this end, a two-lane
road section 10 km long with open boundary conditions was simu-
lated. For an open system, the inﬂow at the upstream boundary is the
natural control parameter. The inﬂow at the upstream boundary was
kept constant at 1,000 vehicles/h/lane. Furthermore, an on-ramp
(merging length 300 m) was assumed at the location x = 7.5 km with
a constant inﬂow of 500 vehicles/h.
The mandatory merge from the on-ramp to the right lane of the
freeway is modeled by a virtual vehicle standing at the end of the
merging lane. Because of the imposed deceleration to avoid a colli-
sion, the attractiveness of the merging lane automatically decreases,
and consequently the incentive to merge onto the freeway increases
when a driver approaches the standing vehicle. To favor lane chang-
ing in this situation, an egoistic behavior is assumed for the merging
vehicle in the weaving lane by setting p = 0.
The impact of the on-ramp on lane-changing behavior with sym-
metric rules is displayed in spatiotemporal diagrams of the lane-
changing events in Figure 2 (upper row) for a politeness factor p = 1.
The displayed lane-changing events from the right to the left lane
and from the left to the right lane express clearly the inhomogene-
ity of the road section. As expected, the local lane-changing rate is
increased near the on-ramp located at x = 7.5 km. The on-ramp
induces a locally strongly increased activity of discretionary lane
changes from the right to the left lane, whereas the number of lane
changes from the left to the right is reduced. Since vehicles merge from
the on-ramp to the right lane of the freeway, the right lane becomes
less attractive for vehicles on the freeway upstream of the merg-
ing zone. Therefore, the incentive to change to the left lane is locally
increased.
This observation is displayed in the distribution of lane-changing
events as a function of space. The diagrams in the lower row of
Figure 2 show the lane-changing rates for simulations with politeness
factors p = 0 and p = 1. The lane-changing rate measures the per-
formed lane changes per kilometer and hour. The simulations for
different values of p show the same form of spatial distribution: the
lane-changing rate is nearly homogeneously distributed up- and
downstream of the on-ramp. In a range of about 500 m around the
center of the on-ramp at x = 7.5 km, the number of lane changes to
Lane-changing events (1/h/km)
6
0
500
1000
1500
2000 Right to Left
Left to Right 
6.5 7 7.5
Position x (km)
8 8.5 9
Lane-changing events (1/h/km)
6
0
500
1000
1500
2000 Right to Left
Left to Right 
6.5 7 7.5
Position x (km)
8 8.5 9
9
8.5
8
7.5
7
6.5
6
0 100 200 300 400 500
Time t (min)
600 700 800 900
Position x (km)
(c) (d)
(a) (b)
9
8.5
8
7.5
7
6.5
6
0 100 200 300 400 500
Time t (min)
600 700 800 900
Position x (km)
FIGURE 2 Spatiotemporal diagrams of lane-changing events ( a) from right to left lane and ( b) from left to right lane for symmetric
lane-changing rules and politeness factor of p /H115491 (each lane change is displayed as a dot; traffic demand /H115491,000 vehicles/h/lane
on main road and 500 vehicles/h on on-ramp) and distributions of lane-changing rate as function of space for ( c) p /H115490 and ( d) p /H115491.

===== PAGE 6 =====

the left lane is increased by approximately a factor of 4, whereas the
changes to the right lane are slightly reduced. This ﬁnding demon-
strates the strong dependence of lane-changing behavior on the spatial
inhomogeneities of the road section. The relative increase is even
higher for polite drivers (p = 1) compared with the simulated egoistic
behavior referring to p = 0. It should be noted that the lane-changing
rate is slightly increased downstream of the on-ramp because of the
increased traffic density (see the following section).
Lane-Changing Rate
The lane-changing rate is now investigated as a function of the traf-
ﬁc density. A method to measure locally the lane-changing rate and
the traffic density in a microscopic simulation is as follows: the road
is divided into subsections (e.g., of length Δx = 1 km) and time is
divided into intervals of duration Δt = 1 min. For each spatiotempo-
ral element ΔxΔt obtained in this way, the number n of lane changes
and the average density ρ are determined. The lane-changing rate is
then given by
Finally, all lane-changing rates belonging to the same density interval
are averaged. Taking different values of Δx, Δt, or Δρ did not change
the results qualitatively.
r= n
xtρ( ) ΔΔ ()10
Multiple simulations of the scenario presented in the previous
section were run with inflows varying from 100 vehicles/h/lane
up to 1,800 vehicles/h/lane and a constant ramp flow of Q
rmp =
500 vehicles/h. The resulting lane-changing rates for politeness
factors of p = 0 and p = 1 and for symmetric and asymmetric lane-
changing rules are shown in Figure 3. The results for the considered
road sections around x = 5.5 km and x = 7.5 km for 1 km length
shown in Figure 3 exhibit the following characteristics:
• The lane-changing rates increase for traffic densities 1/km/lane <
ρ < 10km/lane. A more detailed analysis revealed a quadratic slope
at the origin for small densities.
• The maximum lane-changing rates are reached for intermedi-
ate densities. The maximum is located between 10/km/lane (for p = 1
and asymmetric rules) and 15/km/lane (other cases).
• The peak value depends strongly on the value of the politeness
parameter. For p = 0, the maximum lane-changing rate is about
1,100/h/km (1,400/h/km) for symmetric (asymmetric) rules. For p = 1,
the maximum lane-changing rate is only 600 (450) vehicles/h/km
approximately. Further simulations show that already a positive value
p > 0 reduces the maximum number of lane changes signiﬁcantly.
• With increasing density, velocity differences between neighbor-
ing lanes are reduced. Thus, the lane-changing rates decrease.
• For density values around 30 vehicles/km/lane, the lane-changing
rates on the homogeneous road section around x = 5.5 km are neg-
ligible because changing lanes is no longer proﬁtable or possible
owing to a lack of suitable gaps. This ﬁnding could be attributed to
(a)
0
200
Lane-changing rate [1/(h/km)]
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600 Politeness factor p=0 x=5.5 km
x=7.5 km
0 5 10 15
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
20 25 30 35
(c)
0
200
Lane-changing rate [1/(h/km)]
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600 Politeness factor p=1 x=5.5 km
x=7.5 km
0 5 10 15
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
20 25 30 35
(d)
0
200
Lane-changing rate [1/(h/km)]
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600 Politeness factor p=1 x=5.5 km
x=7.5 km
0 5 10 15
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
20 25 30 35
(b)
0
200
Lane-changing rate [1/(h/km)]
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600 Politeness factor p=0 x=5.5 km
x=7.5 km
0 5 10 15
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
20 25 30 35
FIGURE 3 Lane-changing rates for ( a, c ) symmetric (U.S.) and ( b, d ) asymmetric (European) lane-changing rules as function of
traffic density. In simulations, politeness parameter was considered for values of p /H115490 and p /H115491. Furthermore, diagrams show
lane-changing rates measured in road sections between 5 and 6 km and between 7 and 8 km, respectively.
Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 91

===== PAGE 7 =====

92 Transportation Research Record 1999
the “moving like a solid block” effect proposed by Helbing and
Huberman (31).
• The curves of the lane-changing rates measured at the homo-
geneous road section located around x = 5.5 km and the section at
x = 7.5 km, including the merging area of 300 m, show similar shapes.
Because of the slower vehicles merging from the on-ramp to the
freeway, the lane-changing rate is systematically shifted to higher val-
ues (see the previous section). It should be noted that, for high traffic
densities, the lane-changing rate does not drop to zero. There are
still about 100 to 200 lane changes per hour and kilometer. This
finding agrees with the ﬁndings by Sparmann ( 12).
The politeness parameter p is the most important parameter deter-
mining the lane-changing rate. However, the inﬂuence of the other
MOBIL parameters should be discussed as well. The lane-changing
threshold Δa
th inﬂuences the peak of the curve weakly but does not
change r(ρ) qualitatively. For example, increasing Δath from 0.1 to
0.3 m/s2 reduces the maximum number of lane changes by approxi-
mately 100/h/km. Moreover, the influence of the maximum safe
deceleration b
safe is negligible within a reasonable range of braking
accelerations from −8 m/s2 to −b since the IDM braking strategy
limits braking decelerations to the comfortable deceleration b in nearly
all situations (23). For the special case p = 1, the safety criterion is even
dispensable, as discussed earlier.
Finally, the mean velocities as a function of traffic density cor-
responding to the lane-changing rates are shown in Figure 3 for the
open system. In the simulations, virtual cross sections were imple-
mented in order to aggregate the data with 1-min sampling intervals
mimicking real-world double-loop detector measurements. For each
sample interval, the lane-resolved traffic ﬂow Q
i was recorded and
the arithmetic velocity averages Vi were determined. The density ρ
was calculated by the hydrodynamic relation Q =ρ V from the lane-
averaged quantities and for the road
consisting of L = 2 lanes. To facilitate the discussion, the ﬂuctuations
in the velocities occurring in the 1-min data were suppressed by aver-
aging over all data belonging to the same density class (of class width
Δρ = 2/km/lane).
Figure 4 shows the velocities of the left and the right lane measured
with a detector located at x = 5 km for symmetric and asymmetric
V= Q V Q iii
L
( )=∑ 1Q= Q ii
L
=∑ 1
lane-changing rules and for politeness settings p = 0 and p = 1. In
the simulations, traffic is always free with speeds of about V ≥ 65 km/h.
For symmetric lane-changing rules without any bias, the velocity is
primarily synchronized in all lanes for all densities because of the
lack of any lane preference (see Figure 4a). In contrast, the difference
of average velocities in different lanes in free traffic (Figure 4 b) is
a consequence of explicitly asymmetric lane-changing rules modeled
by the parameter Δa
bias in combination with the passing rule (Equa-
tion 5). The initially equally distributed trucks are mostly found
in the rightmost lane. The separation results in a different velocity–
density relation for the fast (left) lane and the slow (right) lane as shown
in Figure 4b. For both lane-changing scenarios, the velocity differences
decrease with increasing traffic density.
The influence of the politeness factor p leads to the following
findings:
• For symmetric lane-changing behavior, the altruistic lane-
changing behavior corresponding to p = 1 increases the mean speed
of both lanes for traffic densities of about ρ≤ 20/km/lane. There-
fore, the suppression of disadvantageous lane changes for the direct
environment (Equation 4) improves overall traffic performance.
In contrast, an egoistic lane-changing behavior ( p = 0) results (on
average) in higher travel times.
• For asymmetric MOBIL rules, the lane-changing behavior cor-
responding to p = 1 leads to more articulate velocity differences
between the lanes. Although the speed in the passing (left) lane is
higher than in the case for p = 0, the slow (right) lane gets slower.
It should be noted that these variations only occur for intermediate
traffic densities (i.e., when lane changes lead to interactions between
vehicles in neighboring lanes). When a driver–vehicle unit considers
a change to the fast lane, the disadvantage of the follower in the
target lane is included (and weighted) by the politeness factor. An
unselfish driver, therefore, stays in the slower lane to avoid the
perturbation of the faster vehicles in the left lane.
• However, for symmetric and asymmetric MOBIL rules, the dif-
ferences between the lane-changing behavior for different p settings
disappear for densities ρ > 20/km/lane. This result is consistent with
the measured lane-changing rate (see Figure 3) as the number of lane
changes decrease with increasing density because of a lack of suitable
gaps independent from the value of politeness.
(a)
60
65
Mean velocity (km/h)70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
Detector at 5 km p=0, left lane
p=0, right lane
p=1, left lane
p=1, right lane
0 5 10 15
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
20 25 30 35
(b)
60
Mean velocity (km/h)
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Detector at 5 km p=0, left lane
p=0, right lane
p=1, left lane
p=1, right lane
0 5 10 15
Traffic density (vehicles/km/lane)
20 25 30 35
FIGURE 4 Lane-resolved velocities averaged from double-loop detector samples of 1 min at cross section x /H115495 km for 
(a) symmetric and ( b) asymmetric MOBIL rules. Simulation results correspond to lane-changing rates shown in Figure 3 
for politeness factors p /H115490 and p /H115491 (different vertical scale in both diagrams).

===== PAGE 8 =====

CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
Lane-changing models are an important component of microscopic
traffic simulation software. Most of the published and implemented
lane-changing models follow a rule-based approach with different
gap-acceptance conditions and consequently different lane-changing
behavior for various situations. Because of the multiplicity of possi-
ble driving conditions associated with discretionary and mandatory
lane changes, this approach often tends to lead to complex models
with many parameters.
The general concept of MOBIL deﬁning lane-changing models
was presented for a broad class of car-following models. The basic
idea of MOBIL is to measure both the attractiveness of a given lane
(i.e., its utility) and the risk associated with lane changes in terms of
accelerations. That is, both the incentive criterion and the safety
constraint can be expressed in terms of the acceleration function of
the underlying car-following model, which allows for an efficient
and compact formulation of the lane-changing model with only a
small number of additional parameters. As a consequence, the prop-
erties of the car-following model (e.g., any dependence on relative
velocities or the exclusion of collisions) are transferred to the lane-
changing behavior. Moreover, the model is able to describe mandatory
and discretionary lane changes as well as symmetric and asymmetric
lane-changing behavior in a uniﬁed and consistent way. By virtue of
the acceleration-based decisions, the lane changes are more anticipa-
tive that those of gap-based models. For example, if a leading vehicle
in a possible target lane is faster than the own-lane leader, MOBIL in
combination with the IDM can suggest a lane change even if the lead
gap in the target lane is smaller than that in the actual lane. In a way,
MOBIL anticipates that the gap will be larger in the future.
As a novel feature, this model takes into account other drivers via
a politeness factor p. The politeness factor characterizes the degree
of passive cooperativeness among drivers; that is, the subject vehicle
driver makes a decision by considering its effects on other drivers.
More speciﬁcally, even advantageous lane changes will not be per-
formed if the personal advantage is smaller than the disadvantage to
the traffic environment multiplied by p. Furthermore, an aggressive
driver is able to initiate the lane change of his or her leader, which
is commonly observed driving behavior in countries with asymmetric
lane-changing rules and dedicated passing lanes.
The MOBIL concept has only few parameters, and each parameter
is associated with an intuitive meaning. The safety criterion is sim-
ply described by a critical acceleration threshold b
safe. The threshold
Δath prevents lane changing that yields only a marginal advantage.
For the asymmetric incentive criterion, an additional bias parameter
Δa
bias differentiates between default and passing lanes. The optional
politeness parameter p weights the accelerations and decelerations
of the vehicles directly affected by a lane change. The parameters
b
safe, Δath, and Δabias are given in units of the acceleration and are
directly measurable quantities. Therefore, the model parameters could
be calibrated by using highly resolved trajectory data (14, 15). More-
over, the politeness factor can also be empirically tested and measured
by comparing the situation before and after the lane change for the
affected vehicles.
The lane-changing rate was investigated by means of simulation in
an open system with an on-ramp in combination with the IDM, lead-
ing to deterministic lane-changing behavior. The lane-changing rate
is mainly determined by the politeness factor p but depends also on
the considered location of the road section. As shown in the simula-
tions, the lane-changing rate is locally increased at the location of a
road inhomogeneity, which is related to mandatory lane changes. In
Kesting, Treiber, and Helbing 93
order to investigate the role of critical lane changes in increasing the
breakdown probability, one could vary the safety threshold bsafe. A
more generic stochastic approach would be based on a car-following
model that explicitly takes into account perception errors that lead to
a subjective estimate for the utility and safety of a lane change (29).
Obviously, research into empirical justiﬁcation and model calibra-
tion and validation is the next step, with highly resolved trajectory
data (14, 15). However, the empirical investigation of lane-changing
behavior is even more difficult than that for car-following behavior
because more vehicles are involved; the situations are more singu-
lar because of the overlap of the strategic, tactical, and operational
behavior; and ﬁnally, the intra- and interdriver differences will play
even a stronger role as for the longitudinal behavior (32). The diver-
sity of the drivers could be represented in a microscopic simulation by
statistically distributed values for the MOBIL parameters, particularly
for the politeness parameter.
Furthermore, extensions of the proposed acceleration-based con-
cept to other traffic-related decision processes are possible as well.
For example, when approaching a traffic light that switches from
green to yellow, one has to decide whether to stop in front of the
signal or to continue past it. In the framework of MOBIL, the stop
decision will be based on the safe braking deceleration b
safe. Similar
considerations apply when deciding whether it is safe enough to
cross an unsignalized intersection (33), to turn into another road in
a yield situation, or to start an overtaking maneuver in the opposite
lane of a two-way rural road.
Finally, it is emphasized that MOBIL is meant to represent only
the last operational decision of whether to immediately perform a
lane change. In reality, a lane-changing decision includes strategical
and tactical aspects in preparation for this ﬁnal step, which are relevant
particularly for congested traffic and for mandatory lane changes. For
example, tactical behavior may involve accelerations (or decelera-
tions) of the own vehicle or of vehicles in the target lane in preparation
for a lane change, which corresponds to active cooperation between
the drivers. This longitudinal-transverse coupling will be the subject
of a forthcoming paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Volkswagen AG for partial ﬁnancial support within
the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research project
I
NVENT.
REFERENCES
1. Nagatani, T. The Physics of Traffic Jams. Reports of Progress in Physics,
Vol. 65, 2002, pp. 1331–1386.
2. Helbing, D. Traffic and Related Self-Driven Many-Particle Systems.
Reviews of Modern Physics, Vol. 73, 2001, pp. 1067–1141.
3. Laval, J. A., and C. F. Daganzo. Lane-Changing in Traffic Streams.
Transportation Research B, Vol. 40, No. 3, 2006, pp. 251–264.
4. Hidas, P. Modelling Vehicle Interactions in Microscopic Traffic Simula-
tion of Merging and Weaving. Transportation Research C,Vol. 13, 2005,
pp. 37–62.
5. Coifman, B., S. Krishnamurthy, and X. Wang. Lane-Changing Maneu-
vers Consuming Freeway Capacity. In Traffic and Granular Flow ’03
(S. Hoogendoorn, S. Luding, P. Bovy, M. Schreckenberg, and D. Wolf,
eds.), Springer, Berlin, 2005, pp. 3–14.
6. Wei, H., J. J. Lee, Q. Li, and C. J. Li. Observation-Based Lane–Vehicle
Assignment Hierarchy: Microscopic Simulation on Urban Street Network.
In Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Re-
search Board 1710, TRB, National Research Council, Washington,
D.C., 2000, pp. 96–103.

===== PAGE 9 =====

7. Brackstone, M., M. McDonald, and J. Wu. Lane Changing on the Motor-
way: Factors Affecting Its Occurrence, and Their Implications. In Proc.,
9th International Conference on Road Transportation Information and
Control,Conference Publication 454, IEEE, London, 1998, pp. 160–164.
8. Nagel, K., D. Wolf, P. Wagner, and P. Simon. Two-Lane Traffic Rules for
Cellular Automata: A Systematic Approach. Physical Review E,Vol. 58,
1998, pp. 1425–1437.
9. Laval, J. A., and C. F. Daganzo. Multi-Lane Hybrid Traffic Flow Model:
Quantifying the Impacts of Lane-Changing Maneuvers on Traffic Flow.
Working Paper UCB-ITS-WP-2004-1. Institute of Transportation Studies,
University of California, Berkeley, 2004.
10. Hidas, P., and P. Wagner. Review of Data Collection Methods for
Microscopic Traffic Simulation. Proc., World Conference on Transport
Research, Istanbul, Turkey, 2004.
11. Brackstone, M., and M. McDonald. The Microscopic Modelling of
Traffic Flow: Weaknesses and Potential Developments. In Traffic and
Granular Flow (D. E. Wolf, M. Schreckenberg, and A. Bachem, eds.),
World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996, pp. 151–165.
12. Sparmann, U. Spurwechselvorgänge auf zweispurigen BAB-Richtungs-
fahrbahnen. Forschung Strassenbau und Strassenverkehrstechnik,
Vol. 263, 1978.
13. Yousif, S., and J. Hunt. Modelling Lane Utilization on British Dual-
Carriageway Roads: Effects on Lane-Changing. Traffic Engineering &
Control, Vol. 36, No. 12, Dec. 1995, pp. 680–687.
14. Hoogendoorn, S. P., H. J. van Zuylen, M. Schreuder, B. Gorte, and G.
Vosselman. Microscopic Traffic Data Collection by Remote Sensing. In
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board, No. 1855, Transportation Research Board of the National Acad-
emies, Washington, D.C., 2003, pp. 121–128.
15. NGSIM: Next Generation Simulation.U.S. Department of Transportation,
2006. www.ngsim.fhwa.dot.gov.
16. Toledo, T., C. F. Choudhury, and M. E. Ben-Akiva. Lane-Changing
Model with Explicit Target Lane Choice. In Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1934,Trans-
portation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C.,
2005, pp. 157–165.
17. Gipps, P. G. A Model for the Structure of Lane-Changing Decisions.
Transportation Research B, Vol. 20, 1986, pp. 403–414.
18. Toledo, T., H. N. Koutsopoulos, and M. E. Ben-Akiva. Modeling Inte-
grated Lane-Changing Behavior. In Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1857, Transporta-
tion Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C.,
2003, pp. 30–38.
19. Yang, Q., and H. N. Koutsopoulos. A Microscopic Traffic Simulator for
Evaluation of Dynamic Traffic Management Systems. Transportation
Research C, Vol. 4, No. 3, 1996, p. 113.
94 Transportation Research Record 1999
20. Ahmed, K. I. Modeling Drivers’ Acceleration and Lane Change Behavior.
Ph.D. thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1999.
21. Halati, A., H. Lieu, and S. Walker. CORSIM—Corridor Traffic Simula-
tion Model. In Proceedings of the Traffic Congestion and Traffic Safety
in the 21st Century Conference(R. F. Benekohal, ed.), ASCE, New York,
1997, pp. 570–576.
22. Skabardonis, A. Simulation of Freeway Weaving Areas. In Transporta-
tion Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
No. 1802, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies,
Washington, D.C., 2002, pp. 115–124.
23. Treiber, M., A. Hennecke, and D. Helbing. Congested Traffic States in
Empirical Observations and Microscopic Simulations. Physical Review E,
Vol. 62, 2000, pp. 1805–1824.
24. Bando, M., K. Hasebe, A. Nakayama, A. Shibata, and Y. Sugiyama.
Dynamical Model of Traffic Congestion and Numerical Simulation.
Physical Review E, Vol. 51, 1995, pp. 1035–1042.
25. Helly, W. Simulation of Bottlenecks in Single Lane Traffic Flow. In Pro-
ceedings of the Symposium on the Theory of Traffic Flow(General Motors
Research Laboratories, ed.), Elsevier, New York, 1959, pp. 207–238.
26. Jiang, R., Q. Wu, and Z. Zhu. Full Velocity Difference Model for a
Car-Following Theory. Physical Review E, Vol. 64, 2001, p. 017101.
27. Belexius, S. An Extended Model for Car-Following. Transportation
Research, Vol. 2, No. 1, 1968, pp. 13–21.
28. Lenz, H., C. Wagner, and R. Sollacher. Multi-Anticipative Car-Following
Model. European Physical Journal B, Vol. 7, 1999, pp. 331–335.
29. Treiber, M., A. Kesting, and D. Helbing. Delays, Inaccuracies and
Anticipation in Microscopic Traffic Models. Physica A,Vol. 360, 2006,
pp. 71–88.
30. Treiber, M. Microsimulation of Road Traffic [interactive simulation of the
Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) in Combination with the Lane-Changing
Model MOBIL]. 2006. www.traffic-simulation.de.
31. Helbing, D., and B. A. Huberman. Coherent Moving States in Highway
Traffic. Nature, Vol. 396, 1998, pp. 738–740.
32. Ossen, S. J., S. P. Hoogendoorn, and B. G. H. Gorte. Interdriver Differ-
ences in Car Following: A Vehicle Trajectory-Based Study. In Trans-
portation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board, No. 1965, Transportation Research Board of the National Acad-
emies, Washington, D.C., 2006, pp. 121–129.
33. Helbing, D., R. Jiang, and M. Treiber. Analytical Investigation of Oscil-
lations in Intersecting ﬂows of Pedestrian and Vehicle Traffic. Physical
Review E, Vol. 72, 2005, p. 046130.
The Traffic Flow Theory and Characteristics Committee sponsored publication of
this paper.
