===== PAGE 1 =====

Tronspn. Res:B. Vol. 27B, No. 4, pp. 281-287, 1993 0191-2615/93 f6.00 + .OO
Printed in Great Britain. 0 1993 Pergamon Press Ltd.
A SIMPLIFIED THEORY OF
KINEMATIC WAVES IN HIGHWAY TRAFFIC,
PART I: GENERAL THEORY
G. F. NEWELL
Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720, U.S.A.
(Received 9 March 1992)
Abstract - In the theory of “kinematic waves,” as described originally by Lighthill and Whitham
in 1955, the evaluation of the shock path is typically rather tedious. Instead of using this theory
to evaluate flows or densities, one can use it to evaluate the cumulative flow A(x, t) past any
point x by time r. It is shown here how a formal solution for A(x, 1) can be evaluated directly
from boundary or initial conditions without evaluation at intermediate times and positions. If
there are shocks, however, this solution will be multiple-valued. The correct solution, which is the
lower envelope of all such formal solutions, will automatically have discontinuities in slope de-
scribing the passage of a shock. To evaluate A(x, t) at any particular location x, it is not necessary
to follow the actual path of the shock. The solution can be evaluated directly in terms of the
boundary data by either graphical or numerical techniques.
1. INTRODUCTION
In a famous paper, “On Kinematic Waves,” Lighthill and Whitham (1955) described a
theory of one-dimensional wave motion which could be applied to certain types of fluid
motion or to highway traffic flow. Richards (1956) independently proposed a similar
theory for traffic flow. The key postulate of the (L-W-R) theory was that there exists
some functional relation between the flow q and the density (concentration) k. The flow
is defined for fluids as the rate at which mass passes some point and for traffic as the rate
at which vehicles pass some point. The density is defined for fluids as the mass per unit
length of channel and for traffic as the number of vehicles per unit length of road. This
relation between q and k might vary with location x but not with time t, i.e.,
k (x, t) = k*(q (x, t), x) (1)
or
q (x, t) = q* (k (x, t), xl
for some given functions k* or q*.
The conservation equation (equation of continuity) implies that (with no entering or
exiting traffic)
6% (x, t) + a4 (x9 t) =
() (2)
at ax *
which with eqn (1) gives a partial differential equation for q(x, t),
aq
(x9 t) + a4 (x, 0 =
w (Q 0, t)J) o (3)
at ax
*
with
w (4, X) = ak* (4, x)/aq.
The (l/w) is called the “wave velocity,” but in most applications it is more meaningful to
describe the time to travel a given distance than the distance traveled in a given time. We
281

===== PAGE 2 =====

282 t:. F. NEWELL
refer to w as the “pace” of the wave for lack of any other common word for the reciprocal
of the velocity.
The usual method for solving eqn (3) is to note that eqn (3) implies that q(x, I)
remains constant along a characteristic curve (wave) for which
dt/dx = w (q, x). (4)
Thus from any initial or boundary conditions which specify a value of q at some point
x0,&, the same value of q applies at all points along the characteristic curve passing
through x,,t,, namely the curve
5I
(x) = 1, + w (4 (xo, to), z) dz. (5)
t
x0
We will be concerned here mostly with the special case of a homogeneous channel or
road section for which k*(q, x) = k*(q) is independent of x. In this case w is also constant
along the characteristic curve and the characteristic curve is a straight line.
One of the complications in the theory results from the possibility that characteristic
curves for different values of q may intersect giving multiples values of q at the same (x,
t). To complete the theory, it was necessary to introduce shocks (discontinuities in q) and
write separate equations for the path of the shock so as to guarantee the conservation of
mass across the shock path; the shock itself is not a source of mass. The characteristic
curves on either side of the shock path determine the q(x, t) on each side, but each
characteristic terminates at the shock.
It was also necessary to eliminate certain formal solutions of the resulting equations
which are inconsistent with a preferred direction of time. The conservation equations are
invariant to changing x to -x and t to -I, but a flow pattern with shocks obtained by
reversing the direction of x and t is not acceptable.
The numerical solutions of the equations for the shock path are typically rather
tedious.
2. CUMULATIVE FLOWS
In the analysis of problems in highway traffic flow, particularly “queueing” behind a
bottleneck, it is convenient to deal with the “cumulative flow” (see Makagami, et al.,
1971). Let
A (x, I) = cumulative number of vehicles to pass some location x by
time t starting from the passage of some reference
vehicle.
If vehicles do not pass each other, one could imagine that an observer at location x0
numbered the vehicles consecutively as they passed him and he attached the numbers to
the vehicles. The A(x, t) then represents the number of the last vehicle to pass an observer
at x before time 1.
The reason that this is so useful for the analysis of traffic flow is that if one draws
the curves of ,4(x,, t) and A(x2, t) for two locations x, and x2 on the same graph as in Fig.
1, the vertical distance between the curves at time t,A(x,, t) - A(x,, t) represents the
number of vehicles between xi and x2, and the horizontal distance between the curves at
height j represents the trip time of the jth vehicle from x1 to x2 if vehicles do not pass
each other. The area between the two curves describes the total trip time of all vehicles.
Most quantities of interest to the description of traffic flow have simple geometric inter-
pretations.
In Fig. 1, the A-curves should actually be step functions, since the count of vehicles
is integer valued. To define a flow, however, one must “smooth” the curve and interpret
q(x,, t) or q(x,, t) as the derivative of the smoothed curve.

===== PAGE 3 =====

Theory of kinematic waves in highway traffic, Part I 283
t
Time
Fig. 1. Cumulative flow at two locations.
One can similarly define A(x, t) for a fluid as the total mass to have passed x by time
t, measured relative to the passage of some “streamline,” although the physical observ-
ables of interest in fluid dynamics are not necessarily analogous to those of interest in
traffic flow.
One of the advantages of introducing the function A(x, t) for either traffic or fluids,
is that the existence of such a function itself guarantees the conservation of mass (or
vehicle numbers). From the A(x, t) one can evaluate
-aA (x, t) A4 (x, t)
k (x, t) = ax 9 4 (x9 t) = at 9
and the identity
a2A (x, t) a2A (x, t)
axat = atax
is equivalent to eqn (2) provided that the second derivatives exist. A shock would be
represented by a discontinuity in the first derivatives of ,4(x, t), but the conservation
equations will still be valid provided only that A(x, t) is continuous across the shock
path, i.e. the number on a vehicle at the shock is the same as viewed from either side of
the shock.
The key hypothesis of the L-W-R theory is that eqn (1) is valid at any point where q
and k are continuous, i.e.
aA (x, t) (-a A (x, t)
at = 4* ax 3 x . (7)
1
In the absence of shocks, the formal solution of this equation is obtained in the
same way as in the L-W-R theory, namely from the conclusion that q is constant along
the characteristic curves. Knowledge of q also determines k(x, t) at all points along the
characteristic curve from eqn (l), and together they determine the change in A along the
curve, since
dA = (aA/ax)dx + (aA/at)dt = - kdx + qdt = ( -k + qw) dx. (8)

===== PAGE 4 =====

284 G.F. NEWELL
Thus, if one knows ,4(x&,) and q(x,,,t,) at some boundary point, one can determine A(x,
t) at all points along the characteristic curve through (x,,, to).
In the special case of a homogeneous channel, k, q and w are all constant along a
linear characteristic curve and, as a result of eqn (8), so is dA/dx. If we interpret A(x, t)
as a surface in a three-dimensional (A, x, t) space, the surface A(x, t) is a “ruled surface,”
a surface generated by a family of straight lines. The value of A(x,,, t,) and q(x,, to) at any
boundary point would determine a line in the surface A(x, t). From appropriate boundary
data one could quite easily construct such a surface and, thereby, determine A(x, t)
everywhere.
3. SHOCK CONDITIONS
The main advantage of evaluating the A(x, t) rather than q(x, t) relates to the shock
conditions. If characteristic curves intersect, the surface A(x, t) generated in the manner
described above is still easily constructed but it gives a multiple-valued function of x, t.
Each of the values of A(x, t) at the same x, t is derived from different initial or boundary
conditions. To complete the theory, one must specify some recipe which will create from
this multiple-valued surface a unique and continuous “solution.”
For highway traffic, a driver is influenced mostly by motion of vehicles downstream
of him (vehicles of lower number), and the number of vehicles which can pass any
point by time t should not exceed any “constraint” generated by the motion of vehicles
downstream at earlier times. If this theory is to make any sense, there will be a natural
order of cause and effect relations which will create a “well-posed” problem. We claim
that the “solution” one is looking for is the lower envelope of the multiple-valued solution
derived from properly set initial or boundary conditions.
The proposed solution is guaranteed to be continuous and therefore satisfy the
conservation equations, but the derivatives of q and k need not be continuous. A shock
path, the path of any discontinuity in q and k, will emerge automatically from the
geometrical construction of the single-valued A(x, t). To determine the time at which a
shock passes any location x* or the location of a shock at any time t*, one need not
follow the actual path of the shock. It suffices to construct the graph of A(x*, t) versus I
for fixed x* directly from the boundary data and see where it has a discontinuity in the
slope q(x*, t), or construct a graph of A(x, t*) versus x for fixed t* and see where it has a
discontinuity in slope k(x, t*).
We have described the solution procedure above as if one were to construct the
solution graphically on a continuous space of x and 1. In doing so, however, one would
draw only a certain finite number of characteristic curves and interpolate graphically. If
one were to program the procedure for a computer one might prefer to use a discrete
lattice of points in the x, t space. This presents no problem. If one should calculate more
than one value of A(x, t) at some lattice point from different boundary data, one simply
chooses the smallest value. It is not even necessary to specify whether or not a shock
passed. This can be inferred after one has looked at the resulting solution. In contrast
with this, people have encountered all sorts of difficulties trying to solve the original
L-W-R equations for q and/or k on a lattice.
4. BOUNDARY CONDITIONS
There is an enormous variety of practical problems for which the above technique
offers a significant simplification as compared with previous methods for solving the
L-W-R equations. The present methods were actually devised for the purpose of analyz-
ing flows on a freeway with entrance and exit ramps. One is given a time-dependent rate
at which vehicles enter the freeway at entrance i with destination j for all i and j. The
goal is to determine the resulting flow pattern, trip times, exit flows, etc. The details of
this will be described in Part III because the present scheme is only a small part of the
total problem. The above method will be used to determine A(x,+,, t) at the i + lth
ramp from A(x,, t) at the ith ramp or vice versa depending on whether the waves are

===== PAGE 5 =====

Theory of kinematic waves in highway traffic, Part I 285
traveling forward or backward. This could be done without necessarily also evaluating
the ,4(x, t) or following the paths of any shocks for intermediate values of x.
There are a variety of more traditional problems which can be analyzed very easily.
For example:
a) One could specify the trajectory of some “lead” vehicle arbitrarily labeled as vehicle
number 0 for t > to, or, for a fluid, the trajectory of a piston in a long cylindrical pipe,
and also the density k(x, to) for locations upstream of the lead vehicle (or piston) at time
to, x < x,.
The trajectory of the lead vehicle is the curve of constant car number A(x, t) = 0,
and the velocity v(x, t) of the vehicle determines values of q and k along the trajectory
from eqn (1) and the condition q = kv. Thus one knows the value of A and q along the
trajectory from which one can construct a surface A(x, t) passing through this trajectory.
The initial conditions k(x, to) for x < x0 determine
s
5
‘4 (X,f,l) = k (x’,rO)dx’, with A (x0,&) = 0
x
and the value of q(x, to), and therefore a surface ,4(x, t) satisfying these initial conditions.
The final solution is, of course, the lower envelope of any such surfaces A(x, t) if there
are multiple values.
b) To analyze the flow of vehicles through a traffic signal, one typically specifies the flow
q(x,, t) at some location x0 well upstream of the signal, from which one can also evaluate
s
I
A (XoJ) = ,” q(xo,t’ )dt’
relative to some arbitrary vehicle labeled as vehicle 0 passing x0 at time 1,.
At the traffic signal, one further specifies that any vehicle which arrives at the
intersection just as the signal turns red will come to a stop and resume its “free speed”
soon after the signal turns green. In effect, one specifies the trajectory of a vehicle of
known vehicle number, which in turn determines a corresponding surface A(x, t) as in
(a). The final ,4(x, t) will be the lower envelope of surfaces determined from the initial
flow or from the signal. A shock path defining the back of the “queue” will be the locus
of points where these surfaces meet.
c) In the freeway problem mentioned above, one might specify the entrance flow on some
ramp at x,,,, but this flow plus the through flow approaching xi+] might exceed the
capacity of the freeway downstream of the ramp. If the ramp flow does actually pass the
“bottleneck,” then one knows the maximum through traffic that can pass xi+,. One will
thus know the A(x,+,, t) for the through traffic from which one can construct a surface
A(x, t) for x < x,,,. The shock for the back of the queue will be the intersection of this
surface with the surface generated from the upstream flows.
5. HISTORICAL NOTES
In retrospect, one can’t help wonder why something as simple as this has gone
unnoticed for more than 35 years or, if it was noticed, that it was not exploited. Almost
every book dealing with traffic theory which describes the L-W-R theory not only repeats
the same arguments as in the original papers but even reproduces some of the figures
from these papers.
The use of cumulative “input-output” curves itself has an interesting history. Edie
and Foote (1960, 1961) drew graphs of the cumulative number of vehicles to pass specific
locations in the Holland Tunnel. This was perhaps more a convenient way of presenting
their experimental observations than the basis of any “theory,” although they did use
these graphs as a means of showing the propagation of shocks. Herman and Rothery
(1965) also used cumulative curves to describe experimental observations and gave geo-
metric interpretations of various derived quantities.

===== PAGE 6 =====

286 G.F. NEWELL
In the “transportation science” literature, the first use of cumulative curves as a tool
for making theoretical prediction seems to have been by Gazis and Potts (1965). These
curves were described and used with no references, as if they were an obvious tool. In the
“traffic engineering” literature, cumulative curves are described in a paper by Moskowitz
and Newman (1963), but it was apparently a “standard procedure” for the analysis of
freeway traffic among the traffic engineers at the California Division of Highways (now
Caltrans). Some of the engineers who were with Caltrans at that time say that “everyone
knew it.” It seems likely that this was an invention of the late Karl Moskowitz.
For the present generation of transportation engineering students, the use of such
curves is well-known, but it took a long time (a “generation”) for this to become one of
the standard tools of traffic engineering. For people working in related fields of queueing,
inventory, production, etc., which also deal with the flow of objects past various restric-
tions, there is still considerable reluctance to exploit simple graphical methods of analysis
based on cumulative flows.
The three-dimensional representation A@, t) was described by Makigami et al.
(1971). I first wrote some notes about this for a course on queueing theory to show that
an observer at any location x could construct a curve of cumulative flow, and that the
collection of all such curves would describe a surface A(x, t). Y. Makigami, a student in
this class, decided to do an individual study to explore it further. He even made a plaster
of Paris model of a hypothetical traffic pattern.
After we had circulated a draft of a paper, Richard Rothery pointed out that he
had described a similar three-dimensional construction in his (unpublished) Ph.D. thesis
(Rothery, 1968). We agreed to submit the paper with three authors and make reference
to Rothery’s thesis.
Rothery’s thesis also points out that a stationary flow pattern would give a planar
surface for A(x, t) and that a “transition” from one constant flow pattern to another
would propagate with a certain speed. There is no reference in Rothery’s thesis, however,
to the L-W-R theory or to “waves” or “shocks.” Most of Rothery’s thesis deals with
car-following theories.
At that time Karl Moskowitz also called me on the telephone to announce that he
had, for some time, used such three-dimensional figures to describe freeway traffic pat-
terns. I asked him if he could give me a reference, but he said that he never published it
or even wrote any technical reports about it. I had no doubt that he had done it, and I
should have suggested that he join as another coauthor. I lost an opportunity then to give
some recognition to one of the great pioneers of traffic engineering. Unfortunately, he
published very little of what he knew.
The three-dimensional representation A(x, t) was just one of several illustrations of
“tandem queues” included in the second edition of my book on queueing theory, (Newell,
1982). Other illustrations involved “blocking” due to a finite storage between “servers,”
for which the cumulative departures at any server might be constrained by conditions
either upstream or downstream. The actual cumulative curve was the smallest of those
determined by an constraint.
There was also a simple model of a freeway diamond interchange for which the
highway section between an off-ramp and an on-ramp could store only a specified num-
ber of cars. Again, the cumulative flow at the off-ramp was constructed as the minimum
of an arrival curve determined from upstream conditions and a departure curve deter-
mined from downstream conditions at a bottleneck. It was not explicitly noted that when
these two curves crossed, it was the time when the shock wave passed; nor was there any
mention of the connection with the L-W-R theory, but it was noted that one did not need
to know the details of the traffic flow pattern at intermediate points.
More recently I derived some “backward” solutions of the L-W-R equations in terms
of the A(x, t) but with no shocks (Newell, 1988). I am embarrassed that I did not
recognize then the simple solution for the shock conditions. The emphasis in this paper
was on other things (which were less interesting).
The equations of “kinematic waves” arise in many other applications, particularly in
fluid dynamics (flood waves, bores, sonic booms, etc.). I made some inquiries among

===== PAGE 7 =====

Theory of kinematic waves in highway traffic, Part I 287
fluid dynamics specialists if analogous methods of determining shock paths were well-
known in fluid dynamics, and then sent some notes on this to G. B. Whitham. He replied
that the shock-fitting is “well-known to us,” which he later explained meant “to me, my
students, and other hangers-on.”
Whitham sent me a reprint of a paper by J. C. Luke (1972) on erosion of soil. In this
paper the analogue of the A(x, t) is the elevation of the ground. Luke starts with equations
analogous to eqn (7) and solves these equations by, in effect, going back to the kinematic
wave equations (3) to apply the method of characteristics. The shock conditions, how-
ever, are determined from the lower envelope of .4(x, t) surfaces as in Section 3.
It would seem that this trick is obvious to some people working in continuum me-
chanics but unknown to others, much as the use of cumulative curves for the analysis of
traffic problems was obvious to some people and unknown to others.
REFERENCES
Edie L. C. and Foote R. S. (1960) Effect of shock waves on tunnel traffic flow. Highway Research Board
Proc., 39,492-505.
Edie L. C. and Foote R. S. (1961) Experiments on single-lane flow in tunnels. In R. Herman (Ed.), Theory of
Traffic Flow, pp. 175-192. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Gazis D. C. and Potts R. B. (1965) The oversaturated intersection. Proceedings of the Second International
Symposium on the Theory of Traffic Flow, OECD, Paris, pp. 221-237.
Herman R. and Rothery R. W. (1965) Car following and steady state flow. Proceedings of the Second Interna-
tional Symposium on the Theory of Traffic Flow, OECD, Paris, pp. l-l 1.
Lighthill M. J. and Whitham G. B. (1955) On kinematic waves. I: Flood movement in long rivers. II: A theory
of traffic flow on long crowded roads. ProceedingsRoyalSociety, (London), A229,281-345.
Luke J. C. (1972) Mathematical models for landform evolution. J. GeophysicalRes., 77,2460-2464.
Makigami Y., Newell G. F. and Rothery R. (1971) Three-dimensional representations of traffic flow. Trans.
Sci., 5, 302-313.
Moskowitz K. and Newman L. (1963) Notes on freeway capacity. Highway Res. Record, #27, Highway Research
Board, Washington, D.C.
Newell G. F. (1982) Applications of Queueing Theory, 2nd ed. Chapman and Hall, London.
Newell G. F. (1988) Traffic flow in the morning commute. Trans. Sci., 22,47-58.
Richards P. I. (1956) Shock waves on the highway. Opns. Res., 4,42-51.
Rothery R. (1986) Car following-A deterministic model for single-lane traffic flow. D. SC. Thesis, Universite
Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium.
