===== PAGE 1 =====

AgentGuard: Runtime Verification of AI Agents
Roham Koohestani
JetBrains Research, The Netherlands
roham.koohestani@jetbrains.com
Abstract—The rapid evolution to autonomous, agentic AI from mathematics and formal methods with the existing theory
systems introduces significant risks due to their inherent unpre- of these agentic systems [6].
dictability and emergent behaviors; this also renders traditional
In this work, we present AgentGuard, a framework for
verification methods inadequate and necessitates a shift towards
runtime verfication of Agentic AI systems. We provide a proof-
probabilisticguaranteeswherethequestionisnolongerifasystem
will fail, but the probability of its failure within given constraints. of-concept for the verification process and demonstrate how it
This paper presents AgentGuard, a framework for runtime can easily be integrated into existing systems by integrating it
verification of Agentic AI systems that provides continuous, into an existing agentic system, RepairAgent [7]. We conclude
quantitative assurance through a new paradigm called Dynamic
by providing a roadmap for future work building on this
Probabilistic Assurance. AgentGuard operates as an inspection
framework. In the sections to follow we begin by further
layerthatobservesanagent’srawI/Oandabstractsitintoformal
events corresponding to transitions in a state model. It then expanding on the problem (section II), followed by a section
uses online learning to dynamically build and update a Markov outliningtheexistingworkandtheoryonformalverificationof
DecisionProcess(MDP)thatformallymodelstheagent’semergent AI Agents (section III). In section IV we present our approach
behavior.Usingprobabilisticmodelchecking,theframeworkthen
followed by its application to RapairAgent in . We conclude by
verifies quantitative properties in real-time.
presenting a discussion of the proposed framework (section V).
Index Terms—Agentic AI, Formal Verification, Probabilistic
Model-Checking, Runtime Verification
II. TheProblem
The problem and risk associated with these models are, at
I. Introduction
the same time, the characteristics that make them powerful.
The rapid evolution from generative artificial intelligence Here we discuss these further in detail. At the core of modern
(GenAI) to agentic AI marks a measurable leap in AI; agentic systems, you will most likely find a Large Language
Where previously, AI systems were confined to gathering Model(LLM)basedon(amodifiedversionof)thetransformer
and generating content within a well-defined scope, agentic architecture proposed by Vaswani et al. [8]. These models
systems are designed for autonomy. They are implemented to are tied to a stochastic process that makes their outputs, and
perceive,reason,plan,andactindynamicenvironmentthrough thus the behaviors of the agents, nondeterministic [9]. When
tool invocation, memory storage and recall, and feedback multiple actions of these agents, or even multiple agents, are
mechanisms [1], [2]. chained together in a multi-step workflow, this randomness
Althoughthisparadigmshifthasempoweredmultiplesectors, can lead to an exponential divergence from expected behavior,
such as automated hardware verification and [3] complex finan- which influences traceability and verification [10]. These are
cialanalysis[2],theimprovedcapabilitiesofthesesystemsalso attributed to stochasticity and unpredictability.
introduce higher risks. The design that enables the emergent LLMs are known to "hallucinate;" While the exact defi-
behaviorsofagenticsystemsmakesitunpredictableandunsafe. nition of a hallucination is still a matter of debate, we refer
Factors such as (1) stochasticity and unpredictability, (2) to a hallucination when the model generates outputs that are
Hallucinations, (3) Emergent unintended behaviors and (4) factually incorrect or logically flawed. In an agent acting on its
susceptibility to new vulnerabilities, all contribute to this generated beliefs, hallucinations can quickly go from being an
increased risk. annoyance to a failure [9]. Furthermore, interactions between
TheissuesimposedbyagenticAIrendertraditionalsoftware agentsinmulti-agentsystems(MAS)canproduce(unintended)
verification techniques inadequate, given that these methods emergent behaviors; these emergent behaviors can be both
assume deterministic logic and manageable state spaces [4]. beneficialandharmful.AsthesebehaviorsonlyintheseMAS’s,
Until recently, the focus of the field of AI has often been on theseareimpossibletopredictfromanalyzingindividualagents
the capabilities of models in isolation; while valuable, this alone [5]. Recent experiments have even shown emergent
view underestimates the systemic risks that emerge as a result behaviors such as deception and goal subversion [1].
of complexity and scale [5]. With the limitations of these The natural language interface of LLM agents creates new
agentic systems in mind, it becomes imperative that the critical attack surfaces. New security attacks such as prompt injection
questionisnolongerWillthesystemfail?,butratherquestions and red-teaming, where malicious instructions manipulate
of probabilistic determinism, e.g., What is the probability of agent behavior and its propagation between agents ("prompt
failure/success within a given time interval / budget? These infection"), pose significant risks. In multiagent systems built
typesofguaranteescanonlybeprovidedbycombininginsights on inter-agent trust, an adversary could use spoofing or
5202
peS
82
]IA.sc[
1v46832.9052:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====

impersonation to issue malicious commands or exfiltrate planning constraints as a Context-Free Grammar (CFG), which
data [10]. These are threats pointing towards susceptibility to is translated into a Pushdown Automaton (PDA). The agent is
new vulnerabilities. then supervised by this PDA during plan generation; this then
Although all of these issues are important and require verifiesthestructuralvalidityofitsoutput[20].Otherworkuses
attention, it would be impossible to simultaneously tackle Finite-State Machines (FSMs) to enforce a specific reasoning
all of them. Therefore, our emphasis is on managing the loop (e.g., Thought → Action → Observation) through a
unpredictabilityoftheseagenticsystemsandofferingaroadmap decoding monitor that corrects deviations from the prescribed
to address the emergent behaviors of MASs based on our behavior [21].
approach. For highly complex tasks like hardware verification, re-
searchers are building systems where the verification process
III. Background
itself is distributed among a crew of specialized AI agents.
The field of trustworthy AI has led to a growing body Systems such as Saarthi employ agents with roles like Formal
of research that can be viewed as a "verification stack" Verification Lead, Engineer, and Critic to collaboratively
of increasing abstraction. Here, we discuss each of these generateandproveformalproperties.Thesesystemsusedesign
approaches and their limitations. patterns such as reflection (coder-critic loops) and planning
At the lowest level, researchers focus on the formal ver- (Chain-of-Thought) to improve reliability [3], [9].
ification of the neural networks themselves. This is an NP- Thisevolutionarypathrevealsacriticalgap.Currentprocess-
hard problem, and the immense scale of modern LLMs makes level verification focuses on conformance, that is, making sure
exhaustiveverificationcomputationallyinfeasible.Researchhas that an agent follows a predefined set of rules. The problem
madeprogressinprovingspecificproperties,suchasrobustness is that it does not analyze the emergent probabilistic behavior
to adversarial perturbations, using techniques such as SMT that arises from executing that process. It cannot provide a
solvers,abstractinterpretation,andnetworkreduction,butthese map to predict where the agent is likely to go. To achieve true
methods struggle to scale [11]–[14]. assurance, we must move from verifying process conformance
A more practical approach treats the LLM as a generator of to analyzing emergent behavior.
artifacts, such as code, mathematical proofs, or plans, which
IV. TheAgentGuardFramework
are then verified by external tools; this approach is commonly
called black-box testing. This approach uses the full generative In this paper, we propose a new paradigm called Dynamic
powers of the LLMs while relying on the rigor of established Probabilistic Assurance, which shifts the verification process
formal methods for assurance. The approaches in this category from a static and offline setting to a dynamic and ongoing
can be categorized primarily as frameworks performing Post- process. We have implemented a Proof-Of-Concept (POC)
Hoc Verifications and those that embrace LLM-Assisted framework called AgentGuard. Any type of static analysis
Formalization. provides only a snapshot of the system under a fixed set of
Frameworks such as MATH-VF and Safe use LLMs to assumptions.Agenticsystems,however,aredesignedtooperate
translatenaturallanguagesolutionsintoaformalcontext,which in non-stationary environments and adapt based on experience.
is then checked by external tools like SMT solvers or theorem A proof that holds before deployment may be invalidated once
provers (e.g., Lean 4) to identify hallucinations [15], [16]. Sim- theagentinteractswiththerealworld[22].RuntimeVerification
ilarly, VeriPlan applies the probabilistic model checker PRISM (RV)offersacompellingalternative.RVisalightweightformal
toverifythatanLLM-generatedplanforanendusersatisfiesa method that analyzes the actual execution trace of a running
setofuser-definedconstraints[17].Amajorbarriertoadopting system; using this, we can also avoid the state-space explosion
formalmethodsisthedifficultyintranslatingambiguousnatural thatisaprobleminexhaustiveofflinemodelchecking.Although
language requirements into precise specifications. LLMs are itcannotprovepropertiesaboutunobservedpaths,itcanprovide
proving to be quite good at doing this task. Tools such as strongguaranteesabouttheexecutionthatactuallyoccurredand
SpecVerify and Req2Spec use LLMs to automatically generate canbeextendedtomakepredictionsaboutfuturebehavior[23]–
formal assertions from natural language requirements [18], [25].
[19].
A. From Traces to Models
The most recent evolution has moved from verifying static
outputs to verifying the dynamic processes of agentic AI. This Fundamentally, our model is built on top of three key
acknowledges that reliability in agentic systems often stems technologies,namely(1)MarkovDecisionProcesses,(2)Online
fromarobust,iterativeprocessofreasoningandself-correction Learning, and (3) Probabilistic Model Checking.
which is frequently implemented via multiagent collaboration. 1) Formalizing Agents as Markov Decision Processes: The
This type of verification is predominantly categorizable into behavior of an agent making decisions in an uncertain world
Automata-based Control and Verfication via Multi-Agent can be formally modeled using Markovian formalisms. Markov
Collaboration. Decision Processes (MDPs) are the framework of choice
A promising direction uses formal automata to describe for modeling sequential decision making, as they separate
and constrain the high-level behavior of agents. The Formal- an agent’s non-deterministic choices from the environment’s
LLM framework, for instance, allows developers to specify probabilistic outcomes. An MDP is formally defined as a tuple

===== PAGE 3 =====

(𝑆,𝐴,𝑃,𝑅,𝛾) where 𝑆 is a finite set of states, 𝐴 is a finite set policy. The architecture comprises four primary components,
of actions, 𝑃(𝑠′|𝑠,𝑎) is a probability of transitioning to state as depicted in Figure 1.
𝑠′ after taking action a in state a, 𝑅(𝑠,𝑎,𝑠′) is the immediate The Trace Monitor & Event Abstrator is the component
reward received after transitioning from 𝑠 to 𝑠′ via action a, that instruments the agent framework. Its responsibilities are to
and 𝛾 is a discount factor that determines the importance of capturerawI/O(e.g.,LLMcalls,toolinvocations,observations)
future reward [9], [10], [26]. To be able to apply this to an andtoabstractitintoastreamofformaleventscorrespondingto
agentic system, we need to have a mapping from this MDP to transitioninastatemodel(e.g.,𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝐴→ 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
1
→𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝐵).
the components in an agent’s workflow. The States (𝑆) in an Using the stream from the previous step, the Online Model
Agentic MDP (AMDP) are essentially snapshots of the agent’s Learner continuously updates an MDP of the agent’s behavior
progress and context. States are not only defined as a series of and maintains transition probabilities based on observed
previous tool invocations but also contain relevant information frequencies. After each incremental update to the model by
to the next decision of the model. This information can vary the previous stage, the Probabilistic Model Checker performs
by design to be anything from artifacts (e.g., whether an agent quantitativeverificationonthelearnedMDPagainstasetofpre-
has already written tests or not, or whether the agent’s tests definedproperties(asprovidedintheconfigurationfile).Finally,
passed), to the content of the agent’s memory/scratchpad and using the insights from the model checker, the Dashboard
conversation history. presents the quantitative guarantees (e.g. probabilities) to a
Actions (𝐴) can be seen as discrete high-level operations human observer and can be configured to triger alerts or
that the agent chooses to perform. These have direct cor- automated responses if a safety threshold is breached using the
respondence with the invocations of tools in the agent’s actuator.
utility box, such as run_compiler(), execute_test_suite(), and
C. Proof-Of-Concept Implementation
query_static_analyzer()
The transition probability function (𝑃) essentially captures AgentGuard is a Python-based POC framework that demon-
strates the feasibility of our approach. Designed to be
the inherent uncertainty of the agentic workflow. After the
framework-agnostic, it allows developers to define semantic
agent chooses a deterministic action (i.e., performs a tool
states and actions via a logging-style API inspired by RV
invocation), the outcome is probabilistic. When calling the
frameworks, and simplifies code instrumentation with a single
execute_test_suite tool for example, the test suite might pass
function call. The model structure and properties are defined
(which would bring the agent in a tests_passed state), fail, or
outside the agent’s code in a yaml configuration file, meant
timeout.
Finally, the reward function (𝑅) makes the agent’s goal to decouple verification logic and to allow for easy analysis
modifications without affecting the agent. Key components,
explicit. Using this function, we can give positive rewards for
AgentGuardLogger and AnalyzerThread, manage concurrent
making progress (for example, + 3 for passing a new test case),
analysis in AgentGuard. The user-facing class AgentGuard-
negative rewards for setbacks (for example, -5 for a regression)
Logger is initialized with the configuration file path and
and a large reward for successfully completing the entire task.
calls the log_transition method to manage an event queue.
2) Online Learning and Probabilistic Model Checking: A
AnalyzerThread is a background thread that monitors agent
limiting factor in attempting to validate agentic behavior is the
actions, processes transition events, updates the MDP model,
absence of a formal model of the agent a priori. Previous work
and periodically invokes the PMC. We used Storm1 as the
in predictive RV and online learning shows that a probabilistic
model checker via stormpy bindings. A conversion layer in
model (like an MDP, or in our case an AMDP) can be
AnalyzerThread creates a PRISM language model from the
learned dynamically from execution traces. This, combined
MDP for Storm verification against PCTL properties. The
with algorithms designed for non-stationary environments,
results are printed in the console and can trigger user-defined
where model drift may occur, can be used to effectively
callbacks if user-set thresholds are met.
check the behavior of the agent. One the system is modeled
as an MDP, probabilistic model checking (PMC) provides D. Motivating Example: Assurance for an Autonomous Repair
automatedtechniquestoverifyitsquantitativeproperties.Using Agent
probabilistic temporal logic (like PCTL), one can then start
AI for Software Engineering, especially Automated Program
to ask questions of the probabilistic nature, i.e. "What is the
Repair (APR), is an effective showcase for AgentGuard. Con-
maximum probability of reaching a success state within an
siderRepairAgent,anautonomousLLM-basedagentforbugfix-
expected time interval?"
ing[7].RepairAgentemploysactionslikeinformationgathering,
hypothesis formulation, and patching, managed by a finite state
B. The AgentGuard Architecture
machine(FSM)and14tools,includingsearch_code_base
AgentGuardisdesignedtoactasaninspectionlayer thatsits
and write_fix. Despite FSM guidance, the agent can be
atop an existing agentic framework (e.g., AutoGen, LangGraph
inefficient, potentially causing loops, aimless exploration, or
); this is similar to the function of a middleware in the context
high resource use on unlikely fixes. To address these, Agent-
of a web application. It nonintrusively observes the agent’s I/O
GuardcanbeconfiguredwithFSMstates(e.g.,Understandthe
and provides continuous probabilistic assurance by creating a
dynamic, formal digital twin of the agent’s decision-making 1https://www.stormchecker.org/

===== PAGE 4 =====

config.yaml
States/Actions/Props
AutoResponse
Goals
AgenticSystem TraceMonitor Prob. AssuranceDashboard
OnlineModelLearner
(AutoGen/LangGraph) &EventAbstraction ModelChecker &Actuator
RawTrace Events(𝑠→𝑎→𝑠′) LearnedMDP Guarantees(𝑃 max ,𝐸 min)
Alerts
HumanOverseer
HumanIntervention
Fig.1. TheAgentGuardArchitectureWorkflow.ThesystemobservesrawagentI/O,abstractsitintoformalevents,learnsaprobabilisticmodel(MDP),and
usesamodelcheckertoprovidecontinuousassuranceandfeedback.
bug, Collect information, Try to fix the bug, and terminal states improved by introducing notions of stochastic games into the
like Fix_Success or Fix_Failed) and corresponding actions framework and integrating frameworks such as PRISM-games
(relatedtotheagent’stoolssuchas,express_hypothesis, to support analysis of MAS’.
read_range, discard_hypothesis). Middleware-level
VI. Conclusion
instrumentation ensures every tool use triggers a call to
guard.log_transition(...) to record state transi- The rise of agentic AI demands a corresponding evolution
tions. in our assurance methods. Static, offline verification, and
Over time, as RepairAgent addresses bugs, AgentGuard process conformance checks, while valuable, are insufficient
learns its repair strategy’s AMDP, which reveals execu- for guaranteeing the safety and reliability of autonomous
tion patterns. For instance, after hypothesizing, the agent systems operating in dynamic worlds. This paper has presented
uses search_code_base with 75% probability and Dynamic Probabilistic Assurance, a new paradigm for AI
find_similar_api_calls with 25% probability. This safety, and introduced AgentGuard, a tangible framework that
modelenablesreal-timeverificationwithpracticalmanagement demonstrates its feasibility. By integrating runtime verification,
implications. Success probability (𝑃 =?) predicts fix likeli- online model learning, and probabilistic model checking,
max
hood and guides resource allocation and interventions when AgentGuard provides continuous, quantitative guarantees about
low.Theexpectedcyclestocompletion(𝐸 =?)estimatetime an agent’s emergent behavior. It transforms verification from a
min
and cost, with very high values pointing towards loops and one-off, pre-deployment activity into a live, adaptive process.
suggesting automatic termination when over budget. Properties Our vision is for AI systems that are not only increasingly
like 𝑃 =?[𝐺!"write_fix"] show the probability of no fix capable and autonomous, but also transparent, predictable, and
max
and can help with interventions to improve problem-solving. bounded by rigorous, mathematical guarantees of their safety
Applying AgentGuard can improve RepairAgent’s assurance and reliability.
from conformance to continuous monitoring, aiding trust,
VII. Acknowledgements
cost management, and alignment with task complexity. An
application of AgentGuard to RepairAgent can be found in the ThisresearchwascarriedoutandfundedthroughtheAI4SE
study’s replication package [27]. partnership between the Delft University of Technology and
JetBrains Research. You can find more information about the
V. Discussion collaboration on the website of the collaboration here.
The implementation of the POC demonstrates the feasibility References
oftheDPAparadigm.Italsohighlightsseveralimportantareas
[1] H.Du,S.Thudumu,R.Vasa,andK.Mouzakis,“Asurveyoncontext-
for future research and development. The current approach awaremulti-agentsystems:Techniques,challengesandfuturedirections,”
relies on developers to manually define a discrete state space. 2025.
[2] N.Krishnan,“Aiagents:Evolution,architecture,andreal-worldapplica-
Future work should explore techniques for semi-automated or
tions,”2025.
fully automated state abstraction, possibly my incorporating [3] D.N.Gadde,K.K.Radhakrishna,V.N.Viswambharan,A.Kumar,and
ideas from Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes. D.L.et.al.,“Heyai,generatemeahardwarecode!agenticai-based
hardwaredesign&verification,”2025.
The periodic re-verification of the entire model for complex
[4] G. Schwalbe and M. Schels, “A Survey on Methods for the Safety
agents can introduce a substantial overhead with increased Assurance of Machine Learning Based Systems,” in 10th European
complexity. Future work should re-investigate how the current CongressonEmbeddedRealTimeSoftwareandSystems(ERTS2020),
Toulouse,France,2020.
implementation can be improved to incorporate incremental
[5] E.Miehling,K.N.Ramamurthy,K.R.Varshney,M.Riemer,D.Boun-
verification algorithms. Additionally, this system should be effouf,andJ.T.R.et.al.,“Agenticaineedsasystemstheory,”2025.

===== PAGE 5 =====

[6] Y.Zhang,Y.Cai,X.Zuo,X.Luan,K.Wang,andZ.H.et.al.,“The
fusionoflargelanguagemodelsandformalmethodsfortrustworthyai
agents:Aroadmap,”2024.
[7] I.Bouzenia,P.Devanbu,andM.Pradel,“Repairagent:Anautonomous,
llm-basedagentforprogramrepair,”2024.
[8] A.Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,andA.N.G.
et.al.,“Attentionisallyouneed,”2023.
[9] A.Kumar,D.N.Gadde,K.K.Radhakrishna,andD.Lettnin,“Saarthi:
Thefirstaiformalverificationengineer,”2025.
[10] S. Raza, R. Sapkota, M. Karkee, and C. Emmanouilidis, “Trism for
agenticai:Areviewoftrust,risk,andsecuritymanagementinllm-based
agenticmulti-agentsystems,”2025.
[11] H.Liu,S.Liu,G.Xu,A.Liu,andD.Fang,“Nntbfv:simplifyingand
verifyingneuralnetworksusingtesting-basedformalverification,”Inter-
nationalJournalofSoftwareEngineeringandKnowledgeEngineering,
vol.34,no.02,pp.273–300,2024.
[12] S. Gokulanathan, A. Feldsher, A. Malca, C. Barrett, and G. Katz,
“Simplifyingneuralnetworksusingformalverification,”inNASAformal
methodssymposium. Springer,2020,pp.85–93.
[13] C.UrbanandA.Miné,“Areviewofformalmethodsappliedtomachine
learning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2104.02466,2021.
[14] T.LadnerandM.Althoff,“Fullyautomaticneuralnetworkreductionfor
formalverification,”2025.
[15] K. Zhou and L. Zhang, “Step-wise formal verification for llm-based
mathematicalproblemsolving,”2025.
[16] C.Liu,Y.Yuan,Y.Yin,Y.Xu,X.Xu,andZ.C.et.al.,“Safe:Enhancing
mathematicalreasoninginlargelanguagemodelsviaretrospectivestep-
awareformalverification,”2025.
[17] C.P.Lee,D.Porfirio,X.J.Wang,K.C.Zhao,andB.Mutlu,“Veriplan:
Integrating formal verification and llms into end-user planning,” in
Proceedingsofthe2025CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing
Systems,ser.CHI’25. ACM,2025.
[18] A.Beg,D.O’Donoghue,andR.Monahan,“Ashortsurveyonformalising
softwarerequirementsusinglargelanguagemodels,”2025.
[19] W.Wang,M.Farrell,L.C.Cordeiro,andL.Zhao,“Supportingsoftware
formalverificationwithlargelanguagemodels:Anexperimentalstudy,”
2025.
[20] Z.Li,W.Hua,H.Wang,H.Zhu,andY.Zhang,“Formal-llm:Integrating
formallanguageandnaturallanguageforcontrollablellm-basedagents,”
2024.
[21] M. Crouse, I. Abdelaziz, R. Astudillo, K. Basu, S. Dan, and S. e. a.
Kumaravel,“Formallyspecifyingthehigh-levelbehaviorofllm-based
agents,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.08535,2023.
[22] D. B. Acharya, K. Kuppan, and B. Divya, “Agentic ai: Autonomous
intelligenceforcomplexgoals—acomprehensivesurvey,”IEEEAccess,
vol.13,2025.
[23] E.BartocciandY.Falcone,Lecturesonruntimeverification. Springer,
2018.
[24] S. D. Stoller, E. Bartocci, J. Seyster, R. Grosu, K. Havelund, S. A.
Smolka,andE.Zadok,“Runtimeverificationwithstateestimation,”in
Internationalconferenceonruntimeverification. Springer,2011,pp.
193–207.
[25] G. Zhou, W. Liu, and W. Dong, “Runtime verification in uncertain
environmentbasedonprobabilisticmodellearning,”2019.
[26] M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, and D. Parker, “Probabilistic model
checkingandautonomy,”2021.
[27] R. Koohestani, “Agentguard replication package,” 2025. [Online].
Available:https://anonymous.4open.science/r/AgentGuard
