===== PAGE 1 =====

Proceedings of the 2013 Winter Simulation Conference
R. Pasupathy, S.-H. Kim, A. Tolk, R. Hill, and M. E. Kuhl, eds
AN INTRODUCTION TO VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION OF SIMULATION MODELS
Robert G. Sargent
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
L.C. Smith College of Engineering and Computer Science
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244, USA
ABSTRACT
Model verification and validation are defined, and why model verification and validation are important is
discussed. The three approaches to deciding model validity are described. A graphical paradigm that
shows how verification and validation are related to the model development process and a flowchart that
shows how verification and validation is part of the model development process are presented and dis-
cussed. A recommended procedure for verification and validation is given.
1 INTRODUCTION
An introduction to verification and validation of simulation models is given in this paper. Verification and
validation are concerned with determining whether a model and its results are “correct” for a specific use
or purpose. Formally, model verification is defined as “ensuring that the computer program of the com-
puterized model and its implementation are correct” and model validation is defined as the “substantiation
that a computerized model within its domain of applicability possesses a satisfactory range of accuracy
consistent with the intended application of the model.” Our discussion of verification and validation of
simulation models will be primarily concerned with simulation models that are used to predict system be-
haviors such as systems outputs. Two related topics are model credibility and model usability. Model
credibility is concerned with developing in (potential) users the confidence they require in order to use a
model and in the information derived from that model. Model usability is determining that the model and
its user instructions are easy to use.
It is important that verification and validation of a simulation model be performed for each use or
purpose of a model. If the purpose of a simulation model is to answer a variety of questions, the validity
of the model needs to be determined with respect to each question. The developers and users of simula-
tion models, the decision makers using information obtained from the results of these models, and the in-
dividuals affected by decisions based on such models are all rightly concerned with whether a model and
its results are “correct” for each question being addressed.
Numerous sets of experimental conditions are usually required to define the domain of a model’s in-
tended applicability. (A set of experimental conditions contain a set of values for the set of variables that
define the domain of applicability.) A model may be valid for one set of experimental conditions and in-
valid in another. A model is considered valid for a set of experimental conditions if the model’s accuracy
is within its acceptable range of accuracy, which is the accuracy required of the model for its intended
purpose. This usually requires that the model’s output variables of interest (i.e., the model variables used
in answering the questions that the model is being developed to answer) be identified and then their ac-
ceptable range of accuracy specified. A model’s acceptable range of accuracy should be specified prior to
starting the development of the model or very early in the model development process. If the variables of
978-1-4799-3950-3/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 321
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:28:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 2 =====

Sargent
interest are random variables, then properties and functions of the random variables such as means and
variances are usually what is of primary interest and are what is used in determining model validity. Sev-
eral versions of a model are usually developed prior to obtaining a satisfactory valid model. The substan-
tiation that a model is valid, i.e., performing model verification and validation, is generally considered to
be a process and is usually part of the (total) model development process.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the three decision-making ap-
proaches to deciding model validity, Section 3 describes how verification and validation relate to the
model development process, Section 4 gives a recommended validation procedure, and Section 5 contains
the summary.
2 DECISION-MAKING APPROACHES
There are three basic decision-making approaches for deciding whether a simulation model is valid. Each
of these three approaches uses a different decision-maker. All of the approaches require the model devel-
opment team to conduct verification and validation as part of the model development process, which is
discussed in Section 3. One decision-making approach, and a frequently used one, is for the model devel-
opment team itself to make the decision as to whether a simulation model is valid. The decision is based
on the results of the various tests and evaluations conducted as part of the model development process. It
is usually better, however, to use one of the next two decision-making approaches, depending on which
situation applies.
A better decision-making approach is to have the user(s) of a simulation model decide the validity of
the model. In this approach the users of the simulation model are heavily involved with the model devel-
opment team when the team is conducting verification and validation of the model and the users deter-
mine if the model is satisfactory in each phase of verification and validation. This approach is generally
used with a model development team whose size is not large. Also, this approach aids in model credibility.
Another decision-making approach, usually called “independent verification and validation” (IV&V),
uses a third party to decide whether the simulation model is valid. The third party (the IV&V team) is in-
dependent of both the simulation development team(s) and the model sponsor/user(s). The IV&V ap-
proach is generally used with the development of large-scale simulation models, whose development usu-
ally involves several teams. The IV&V team needs to have a thorough understanding of the intended
purpose(s) of the simulation model in order to conduct IV&V. There are two common ways that the
IV&V team conducts IV&V: (a) IV&V is conducted concurrently with the development of the simulation
model and (b) IV&V is conducted after the simulation model has been developed.
In the concurrent way of conducting IV&V, the model development team(s) gives their model verifi-
cation and validation test results to the IV&V team as the simulation model is being developed. The
IV&V team evaluates these results and provides feedback to the model development team regarding
whether the model verification and validation is satisfying the model requirements and when not, what the
difficulties are. When conducting IV&V this way, the development of a simulation model should not pro-
gress to the next stage of development until the model has satisfied the verification and validation re-
quirements in its current stage. It is the author’s opinion that this is the better of the two ways to conduct
IV&V.
When IV&V is conducted after the simulation model has been completely developed, the evaluation
performed by the IV&V team can range from simply evaluating the verification and validation conducted
by the model development team to performing a separate thorough verification and validation effort
themselves. Performing a complete IV&V effort after the model has been completely developed is usually
both extremely costly and time consuming. This author’s view is that if IV&V is going to be conducted
on a completed simulation model then it is usually best to only evaluate the verification and validation
that has already been performed.
The IV&V approach is also useful for model credibility. When verification and validation is conduct-
ed by an independent (third) party and they conclude the simulation model is valid, there is a much great-
322
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:28:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 3 =====

Sargent
er likelihood that others will accept the model as valid and results from the model as being “correct”.
Cases where this decision-making approach is helpful are (i) when the problem associated with the model
has a high cost or involves a high risk situation and (ii) when public acceptance of results based on the
model is desired.
3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT PROCESS WITH VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION
In this section a graphical paradigm is presented in subsection 3.1 that relates model verification and vali-
dation to the model development process. Then in subsection 3.2 the model development process is de-
scribed that includes verification and validation.
3.1 A Simple Graphical Paradigm
There are two common ways to view how verification and validation relate to the model development
process. One way uses a simple view and the other uses a complex view. A simple graphical paradigm is
presented in Figure 1 that was developed by this author called the Simplified View of the Model Devel-
opment Process (Sargent 1981, 1982, 1983, 2001, 2011, 2013). A more complex paradigm developed by
this author that includes both the “Simulation World” and the “Real World” is contained in Sargent (2001,
2013).
Figure 1: Simplified version of the model development process.
Consider the simplified version of the model development process in Figure 1. The problem entity is
the system (real or proposed), idea, situation, policy, or phenomena to be modeled; the conceptual model
is the mathematical/logical/graphical representation (mimic) of the problem entity developed for a partic-
ular study; and the computerized model is the conceptual model implemented on a computer. The concep-
tual model is developed through an analysis and modeling phase, the computerized model is developed
through a computer programming and implementation phase, and inferences about the problem entity are
obtained by conducting computer experiments on the computerized model in the experimentation phase.
We now relate model verification and validation to this simplified version of the model development
process. (See Figure 1.) Conceptual model validation is defined as determining that the theories and as-
323
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:28:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 4 =====

Sargent
sumptions underlying the conceptual model are correct and that the model representation of the problem
entity is “reasonable” for the intended purpose of the model. Computerized model verification is defined
as assuring that the computer programming and implementation of the conceptual model are correct. Op-
erational validation is defined as determining that the model’s output behavior has a satisfactory range of
accuracy for the model’s intended purpose over the domain of the model’s intended applicability. Data
validity is defined as ensuring that the data necessary for model building, model evaluation and testing,
and conducting the model experiments to solve the problem are adequate and correct.
3.2 Model Development Process
A model should be developed for a specific purpose or use. Furthermore, a model should be developed
such that it is a parsimonious model meaning that it is as simple as possible yet meets its purpose. A
simulation model is a structural model meaning that the model contains logical and causal relationships
that occur in the systems. (Note: Empirical models are developed purely from data with an example being
a regression model. Empirical and structural models are two different types of models.) Developing a val-
id simulation model is an iterative process where several versions of a model are developed prior to ob-
taining a valid model.
Figure 2: The model development iterative process.
324
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:28:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 5 =====

Sargent
The model development process should include model verification and validation. Following the par-
adigm given in Figure 1, the iterative process shown in Figure 2 can be used to develop a valid simulation
model (Sargent 1984). We first develop a conceptual model through analyzing the problem entity and
then developing a model of the problem entity, remembering that a parsimonious model is desired. Then
conceptual model validation is performed. This process is repeated until the conceptual model is satisfac-
tory. Next a computerized model is developed of the (validated) conceptual model by developing a simu-
lation model of the conceptual model and implementing it on a computer. Then computerized model veri-
fication is performed. This process is repeated until the computerized model is satisfactory. Lastly,
operational validation is performed on the computerized model. Model changes required by conducting
operational validity can be in either the conceptual model or in the computerized model. Verification and
validation must be performed again when any model change is made. This process is repeated until a val-
id simulation model is obtained. As stated above, several versions of a model are usually developed prior
to obtaining a valid simulation model. (The specifics for conducting conceptual model validation, com-
puterized model verification, and operational validity are discussed in, e.g., Sargent (1984, 2011, 2013).)
It is often too costly and time consuming to determine that a model is absolutely valid over the com-
plete domain of its intended applicability. Instead, tests and evaluations are conducted until sufficient con-
fidence is obtained that a model can be considered valid for its intended purpose or use (Sargent 1982,
1984). If a test determines that a model does not have sufficient accuracy for any one of the sets of exper-
imental conditions, then the model is invalid. However, determining that a model has sufficient accuracy
for numerous sets of experimental conditions does not guarantee that a model is valid everywhere in its
applicable domain. Figure 3 contains two relationship curves regarding confidence that a model is valid
(Confidence in Model) over the range of 0-100 percent as they would occur in most cases. (Note that the-
se curves are qualitative conceptual curves and that they cannot be quantitatively calculated.) The cost
curve (and a similar relationship holds for the amount of time) of performing model validation shows cost
increases at an increasing rate as the confidence in the model increases. The value curve shows that the
value of a model to a user increases as the confidence in a model increases but at a decreasing rate. (In
some cases these curves may have a different shape for the lower confidence range but would usually be
similar to what is shown in Figure 3 for the upper confidence range.) The cost of model validation is usu-
ally quite significant, especially when extremely high model confidence is required.
Figure 3: Confidence that model is valid.
4 RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE
This author recommends that the following eight steps be performed in model verification and validation:
325
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:28:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 6 =====

Sargent
1. An agreement be made prior to developing the model between (a) the model development team and (b)
the model sponsors and (if possible) the users that specifies the decision-making approach and a mini-
mum set of specific validation techniques to be used in determining model validity.
2. Specify the acceptable range of accuracy required of the simulation model’s output variables of interest
for the model’s intended application prior to starting the development of the model or very early in the
model development process.
3. Test, wherever possible, the assumptions and theories underlying the simulation model.
4. In each model iteration, perform at least face validity on the conceptual model.
5. In each model iteration, at least explore the simulation model’s behavior using the computerized model.
6. In at least the last model iteration, make comparisons, if possible, between the simulation model and
system behavior (output) data for at least a few sets of experimental conditions, and preferably for several
sets.
7. Prepare the verification and validation documentation for inclusion in the simulation model documenta-
tion.
8. If the simulation model is to be used over a period of time, develop a schedule for periodic review of
the model’s validity.
Note: Discussions of the various validation techniques and model documentation can be found in, e.g.,
Sargent (1984, 2011, 2013).
Some simulation models are developed for repeated use. A procedure for reviewing the validity of these
models over their life cycles needs to be developed, as specified in Step 8. No general procedure can be
given because each situation is different. For example, if no data were available on the system when a
simulation model was initially developed and validated, then revalidation of the model should take place
prior to each usage of the model if new data or system understanding has occurred since the last valida-
tion.
5 SUMMARY
Model verification and validation are critical in the development of a simulation model because a model
and its results need to be “correct.” Every simulation project presents a new and unique challenge regard-
ing model verification and validation. This introduction to verification and validation presented what it is,
why it is important, who the decision-maker is, how it relates to the model development process through
the use of a graphical paradigm and a flow chart, and a procedure for performing it. The specifics on how
to do the verification and validation tests and evaluations can be found in, e.g., Sargent (2011, 2013).
There is considerable literature on model verification and validation. There are conference tutorials
and papers (e.g., Sargent (2011)), journal articles (e.g., Gass (1983), Landry, Malouin, and Oral (1983),
Sargent (2013)), discussions in textbooks (e.g., Banks et al. (2010), Law (2007), Robinson (2004), Zeigler,
B. P., H. Praehofer, and T. G. Kim (2000)), U.S.A. Government Reports (e.g., DoDI 5000.61 (2009) and
U. S. General Accounting Office (1987)), and books (Knepell and Arangno 1993, Oberkampf and Roy
2010) that can be used to further your knowledge on model verification and validation.
REFERENCES
Banks, J., J. S. Carson II, B. L. Nelson, and D. Nicol. 2010. Discrete-Event System Simulation. 5th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
DoDI. 2009. DoDI 5000.61: DoD Modeling And Simulation Verification, Validation, and Accreditation.
U.S. Department of Defense. December 9, 2009.
326
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:28:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 7 =====

Sargent
Gass, S. I. 1983. “Decision-aiding models: validation, assessment, and related issues for policy analysis.”
Operations Research 31 (4): 601-663.
Knepell, P. L., and D. C. Arangno. 1993. Simulation Validation: A Confidence Assessment Methodology.
IEEE Computer Society Press.
Landry, M., J. L. Malouin, and M. Oral. 1983. “Model Validation in Operations Research.” European
Journal of Operational Research 14: 207-220.
Law, A. M. 2007. Simulation Modeling And Analysis. 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Oberkampf, W. L. and J. Roy. 2010. Verification and Validation in Scientific Computing. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Robinson, S. 2004. Simulation: The Practice of Model Development and Use. Chichester, West Sussex,
England: John Wiley.
Sargent, R. G. 1981. “An Assessment Procedure and a Set of Criteria for Use in the Evaluation of Com-
puterized Models and Computer-Based Modeling Tools.” Final Technical Report RADC-TR-80-409,
U.S. Air Force.
Sargent, R. G. 1982. “Verification and Validation of Simulation Models.” Chapter IX in Progress in
Modelling and Simulation, edited by F. E. Cellier, 159-169. London: Academic Press.
Sargent, R. G. 1983. “Validating Simulation Models.” In Proc. 1983 Winter Simulation Conf., edited by S.
Roberts, J. Banks, and B. Schmeiser, 333-337. Piscataway, New Jersey: Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers Inc.
Sargent, R. G. 1984. “Simulation Model Validation.” Chapter 19 in Simulation and Model-Based Meth-
odologies: An Integrative View, edited by T. I. Oren, B. P. Zeigler, and M. S. Elzas, 537-555. Heidel-
berg, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Sargent, R. G. 2001. “Some Approaches and Paradigms for Verifying and Validating Simulation Models.”
In Proc. 2001 Winter Simulation Conf., edited by B. A. Peters, J. S. Smith, D. J. Medeiros, and M. W.
Rohrer,106-114. Piscataway, New Jersey: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers Inc.
Sargent, R. G. 2011. “Verification and Validation of Simulation Models.” In Proc. 2011 Winter Simula-
tion Conf., edited by S. Jain, R. R. Ceasey, J. Himmelspach, K. P. White, and M. Fu,183-198. Pisca-
taway, New Jersey: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers Inc.
Sargent, R. G. 2013. “Verification and Validation of Simulation Models.” Journal of Simulation 7:12-24.
U. S. General Accounting Office. 1987. “DOD Simulations: Improved Assessment Procedures Would In-
crease the Credibility of Results.” Report ID: PEMD-88-3.
Zeigler, B. P., H. Praehofer, and T. G. Kim. 2000. Theory of Modelling and Simulation. 2nd ed. Academ-
ic Press.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY
ROBERT G. SARGENT is a Professor Emeritus of Syracuse University. He received his education at
The University of Michigan. Dr. Sargent has served his profession in numerous ways including being the
General Chair of the 1977 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), serving on the WSC Board of Directors
for ten years and chairing the Board for two years, being a Department Editor for the Communications of
the ACM, holding the Presidency and other offices of what is now the INFORMS Simulation Society,
serving as Founding President of the WSC Foundation, and initiating the founding of the Simulation Ar-
chive. He has received several awards and honors for his professional contributions including the
INFORMS Simulation Society’s Lifetime Professional Achievement Award and their Distinguished Ser-
vice Award, a WSC 40th anniversary landmark paper award, the WSC Wilson Award,
ACM SIGSIM Distinguished Contributions Award, service awards from ACM and IIE, and a Fellow of
INFORMS and of AAAS. His current research interests include the methodology areas of modeling and
of simulation, model validation, and performance evaluation. Professor Sargent has published extensively
and is listed in Who’s Who in America and in Who’s Who in the World. His e-mail is rsargent@syr.edu.
327
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:28:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
