===== PAGE 1 =====

Proceedings of the 2010 Winter Simulation Conference
B. Johansson, S. Jain, J. Montoya-Torres, J. Hugan, and E. Yücesan, eds.
VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION OF SIMULATION MODELS
Robert G. Sargent
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
L. C. Smith College of Engineering and Computer Science
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244, USA
ABSTRACT
In this paper we discuss verification and validation of simulation models. Four different approaches to de-
ciding model validity are described; two different paradigms that relate verification and validation to the
model development process are presented; various validation techniques are defined; conceptual model
validity, model verification, operational validity, and data validity are discussed; a way to document re-
sults is given; a recommended procedure for model validation is presented; and model accreditation is
briefly discussed.
1 INTRODUCTION
Simulation models are increasingly being used to solve problems and to aid in decision-making. The de-
velopers and users of these models, the decision makers using information obtained from the results of
these models, and the individuals affected by decisions based on such models are all rightly concerned
with whether a model and its results are “correct”. This concern is addressed through model verification
and validation. Model verification is often defined as “ensuring that the computer program of the compu-
terized model and its implementation are correct” and is the definition adopted here. Model validation is
usually defined to mean “substantiation that a computerized model within its domain of applicability pos-
sesses a satisfactory range of accuracy consistent with the intended application of the model” (Schlesinger
et al. 1979) and is the definition used here. A model sometimes becomes accredited through model accre-
ditation. Model accreditation determines if a model satisfies specified model accreditation criteria accord-
ing to a specified process. A related topic is model credibility. Model credibility is concerned with devel-
oping in (potential) users the confidence they require in order to use a model and in the information
derived from that model.
A model should be developed for a specific purpose (or application) and its validity determined with
respect to that purpose. If the purpose of a model is to answer a variety of questions, the validity of the
model needs to be determined with respect to each question. Numerous sets of experimental conditions
are usually required to define the domain of a model’s intended applicability. A model may be valid for
one set of experimental conditions and invalid in another. A model is considered valid for a set of expe-
rimental conditions if the model’s accuracy is within its acceptable range, which is the amount of accura-
cy required for the model’s intended purpose. This usually requires that the model’s output variables of
interest (i.e., the model variables used in answering the questions that the model is being developed to an-
swer) be identified and that their required amount of accuracy be specified. The amount of accuracy re-
quired should be specified prior to starting the development of the model or very early in the model de-
velopment process. If the variables of interest are random variables, then properties and functions of the
random variables such as means and variances are usually what is of primary interest and are what is used
in determining model validity. Several versions of a model are usually developed prior to obtaining a sa-
tisfactory valid model. The substantiation that a model is valid, i.e., performing model verification and va-
978-1-4244-9865-9/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE 166
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 2 =====

Sargent
lidation, is generally considered to be a process and is usually part of the (total) model development
process.
It is often too costly and time consuming to determine that a model is absolutely valid over the com-
plete domain of its intended applicability. Instead, tests and evaluations are conducted until sufficient con-
fidence is obtained that a model can be considered valid for its intended application (Sargent 1982,
1984a). If a test determines that a model does not have sufficient accuracy for any one of the sets of expe-
rimental conditions, then the model is invalid. However, determining that a model has sufficient accuracy
for numerous experimental conditions does not guarantee that a model is valid everywhere in its applica-
ble domain. Figure 1 shows the relationships between model confidence and (a) cost (a similar relation-
ship holds for the amount of time) of performing model validation and (b) the value of the model to a us-
er. The cost of model validation is usually quite significant, especially when extremely high model
confidence is required.
Figure 1: Model Confidence
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the basic approaches used in
deciding model validity; Section 3 describes two different paradigms used in verification and validation;
Section 4 defines validation techniques; Sections 5, 6, 7, and 8 discuss data validity, conceptual model va-
lidity, computerized model verification, and operational validity, respectively; Section 9 describes a way
of documenting results; Section 10 gives a recommended validation procedure; Section 11 contains a
brief description of accreditation; and Section 12 presents the summary. (Note that this tutorial paper is
similar to Sargent (2009).)
2 BASIC APPROACHES
There are four basic decision-making approaches for deciding whether a simulation model is valid. Each
of the approaches requires the model development team to conduct verification and validation as part of
the model development process, which is discussed in Section 3. One approach, and a frequently used
one, is for the model development team itself to make the decision as to whether a simulation model is va-
lid. A subjective decision is made based on the results of the various tests and evaluations conducted as
part of the model development process. However, it is usually better to use one of the next two approach-
es, depending on which situation applies.
If the size of the simulation team developing the model is small, a better approach than the one above
is to have the user(s) of the model heavily involved with the model development team in deciding the va-
lidity of the simulation model. In this approach the focus of determining the validity of the simulation
model moves from the model developers to the model users. Also, this approach aids in model credibility.
Another approach, usually called “independent verification and validation” (IV&V), uses a third (in-
dependent) party to decide whether the simulation model is valid. The third party is independent of both
the simulation development team(s) and the model sponsor/user(s). The IV&V approach should be used
when developing large-scale simulation models, whose developments usually involve several teams.
(This approach is also useful in model credibility, especially when the problem the simulation model is
associated with has a high cost.) The third party needs to have a thorough understanding of the intended
167
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 3 =====

Sargent
purpose(s) of the simulation model in order to conduct IV&V. There are two common ways that the third
party conducts IV&V: (a) IV&V is conducted concurrently with the development of the simulation model
and (b) IV&V is conducted after the simulation model has been developed.
In the concurrent way of conducting IV&V, the model development team(s) receives inputs from the
IV&V team regarding verification and validation as the model is being developed. When conducting
IV&V this way, the development of a simulation model should not progress to the next stage of develop-
ment until the model has satisfied the verification and validation requirements in its current stage. It is the
author’s opinion that this is the better of the two ways to conduct IV&V.
When IV&V is conducted after the simulation model has been completely developed, the evaluation
performed can range from simply evaluating the verification and validation conducted by the model de-
velopment team to performing a complete verification and validation effort. Wood (1986) describes expe-
riences over this range of evaluation by a third party on energy models. One conclusion that Wood makes
is that performing a complete IV&V effort after the simulation model has been completely developed is
both extremely costly and time consuming, especially for what is obtained. This author’s view is that if
IV&V is going to be conducted on a completed simulation model then it is usually best to only evaluate
the verification and validation that has already been performed.
The last approach for determining whether a model is valid is to use a scoring model. (See Balci
(1989), Gass (1993), and Gass and Joel (1987) for examples of scoring models.) Scores (or weights) are
determined subjectively when conducting various aspects of the validation process and then combined to
determine category scores and an overall score for the simulation model. A simulation model is consi-
dered valid if its overall and category scores are greater than some passing score(s). This approach is sel-
dom used in practice.
This author does not believe in the use of scoring models for determining validity because (1) a model
may receive a passing score and yet have a defect that needs to be corrected, (2) the subjectiveness of this
approach tends to be hidden resulting in this approach appearing to be objective, (3) the passing scores
must be decided in some (usually) subjective way, (4) the score(s) may cause over confidence in a model,
and (5) the scores can be used to argue that one model is better than another.
3 PARADIGMS
In this section we present and discuss paradigms that relate verification and validation to the model de-
velopment process. There are two common ways to view this relationship. One way uses a simple view
and the other uses a complex view. Banks, Gerstein, and Searles (1988) reviewed work using both of
these ways and concluded that the simple way more clearly illuminates model verification and validation.
We present one paradigm for each way developed by this author. The paradigm of the simple way is pre-
sented first and is this author’s preferred paradigm.
Consider the simplified version of the model development process in Figure 2 (Sargent 1981). The
problem entity is the system (real or proposed), idea, situation, policy, or phenomena to be modeled; the
conceptual model is the mathematical/logical/verbal representation (mimic) of the problem entity devel-
oped for a particular study; and the computerized model is the conceptual model implemented on a com-
puter. The conceptual model is developed through an analysis and modeling phase, the computerized
model is developed through a computer programming and implementation phase, and inferences about
the problem entity are obtained by conducting computer experiments on the computerized model in the
experimentation phase.
We now relate model validation and verification to this simplified version of the modeling process.
(See Figure 2.) Conceptual model validation is defined as determining that the theories and assumptions
underlying the conceptual model are correct and that the model representation of the problem entity is
“reasonable” for the intended purpose of the model. Computerized model verification is defined as assur-
ing that the computer programming and implementation of the conceptual model is correct. Operational
validation is defined as determining that the model’s output behavior has sufficient accuracy for the mod-
168
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 4 =====

Sargent
Problem Entity
(Syste m)
Operational
Conceptual
Model
Validation
Validation
Analysis
Experimentation
and
Data Modeling
Validity
Computerized Computer Programming Conceptual
Model and Implementation Model
Compute rized
Model
Verification
Figure 2: Simplified Version of the Modeling Process
el’s intended purpose over the domain of the model’s intended applicability. Data validity is defined as
ensuring that the data necessary for model building, model evaluation and testing, and conducting the
model experiments to solve the problem are adequate and correct.
An iterative process is used to develop a valid simulation model (Sargent 1984a). A conceptual model
is developed followed by conceptual model validation. This process is repeated until the conceptual mod-
el is satisfactory. Next the computerized model is developed from the conceptual model followed by
computerized model verification. This process is repeated until the computerized model is satisfactory.
Next operational validity is conducted on the computerized model. Model changes required by conducting
operational validity can be in either the conceptual model or in the computerized model. Verification and
validation must be performed again when any model change is made. Usually several models are devel-
oped prior to obtaining a valid simulation model.
A detailed way of relating verification and validation to developing simulation models and system
theories is shown in Figure 3. This paradigm shows the processes of developing system theories and si-
mulation models and relates verification and validation to both of these processes.
This paradigm (Sargent 2001b) shows a Real World and a Simulation World. We first discuss the
Real World. There exist some system or problem entity in the real world of which an understanding of is
desired. System theories describe the characteristics and the causal relationships of the system (or problem
entity) and possibly its behavior (including data). System data and results are obtained by conducting ex-
periments (experimenting) on the system. System theories are developed by abstracting what has been
observed from the system and by hypothesizing from the system data and results. If a simulation model
exists of this system, then hypothesizing of system theories can also be done from simulation data and re-
sults. System theories are validated by performing theory validation. Theory validation involves the com-
parison of system theories against system data and results over the domain the theory is applicable for to
determine if there is agreement. This process requires numerous experiments to be conducted on the real
system.
We now discuss the Simulation World, which shows a slightly more complicated model development
process than the previous paradigm (Figure 2). A simulation model should only be developed for a set of
well-defined objectives. The conceptual model is the mathematical/logical/verbal representation (mimic)
of the system developed for the objectives of a particular study. The simulation model specification is a
written detailed description of the software design and specification for programming and implementing
the conceptual model on a particular computer system. The simulation model is the conceptual model
169
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 5 =====

Sargent
SYSTEM EXPERIMENTING SYSTEM SYSTEM
DATA/RESULTS (PROBLEM EXPERIMENT
ENTITY) OBJECTIVES
REAL
WORLD
HYPOTHESIZING ABS TRACTING
Theory
Validation
ADDITIONAL
Operational SYSTEM
(Results) THEORIES
(T
E
E
X
S
P
T
E
S
R
)
I
N
M
E
E
E
N
D
T
E
S
D
Validation Conceptual
Model
Validation
HYPOTHESIZING
MODELING
SIMULATION
SIMULATION
MODEL CONCEPTUAL EXPERIMENT
DATA/RESULTS MODEL OBJECTIVES
SIMULATION
WORLD
SPECIFYING
EXPERIMENTING Specification
Verification
SIMULATION IMPLEMENTING
SIMULATION
MODEL
MODEL
SPECIFICATION
Implementation
Verification
Figure 3: Real World and Simulation World Relationships with Verification and Validation
running on a computer system such that experiments can be conducted on the simulation model. The si-
mulation model data and results are the data and results from experiments conducted (experimenting) on
the simulation model. The conceptual model is developed by modeling the system for the objectives of
the simulation study using the understanding of the system contained in the system theories. The simula-
tion model is obtained by implementing the model on the specified computer system, which includes pro-
gramming the conceptual model whose specifications are contained in the simulation model specification.
Inferences about the system are made from data obtained by conducting computer experiments (experi-
menting) on the simulation model.
Conceptual model validation is defined as determining that the theories and assumptions underlying
the conceptual model are consistent with those in the system theories and that the model representation of
the system is “reasonable” for the intended purpose of the simulation model. Specification verification is
defined as assuring that the software design and the specification for programming and implementing the
conceptual model on the specified computer system is satisfactory. Implementation verification is defined
as assuring that the simulation model has been implemented according to the simulation model specifica-
tion. Operational validation is defined as determining that the model’s output behavior has sufficient ac-
curacy for the model’s intended purpose over the domain of the model’s intended applicability.
170
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 6 =====

Sargent
This paradigm shows processes for developing both valid system theories and valid simulation mod-
els. Both are accomplished through iterative processes. To develop valid system theories, which are
usually for a specific purpose, the system is first observed and then abstraction is performed from what
has been observed to develop proposed system theories. These theories are tested for correctness by con-
ducting experiments on the system to obtain data and results to compare against the proposed system
theories. New proposed system theories may be hypothesized from the data and comparisons made, and
also possibly from abstraction performed on additional system observations. These new proposed theories
will require new experiments to be conducted on the system to obtain data to evaluate the correctness of
these proposed system theories. This process repeats itself until a satisfactory set of validated system
theories has been obtained. To develop a valid simulation model, a process similar to the one for the pre-
vious paradigm is performed with the only difference being more detail is given in this paradigm. Several
versions of a model are usually developed prior to obtaining a satisfactory valid simulation model. Model
verification and validation must be performed in each model iteration.
4 VALIDATION TECHNIQUES
This section describes validation techniques and tests commonly used in model verification and vali-
dation. Most of the techniques described here are found in the literature, although some may be described
slightly differently. They can be used either subjectively or objectively. By “objectively,” we mean using
some type of mathematical procedure or statistical test, e.g., hypothesis tests or confidence intervals. A
combination of techniques is generally used. These techniques are used for verifying and validating the
submodels and the overall model.
Animation: The model’s operational behavior is displayed graphically as the model moves through
time. E.g., the movements of parts through a factory during a simulation run are shown graphically.
Comparison to Other Models: Various results (e.g., outputs) of the simulation model being validated
are compared to results of other (valid) models. For example, (1) simple cases of a simulation model are
compared to known results of analytic models, and (2) the simulation model is compared to other simula-
tion models that have been validated.
Degenerate Tests: The degeneracy of the model’s behavior is tested by appropriate selection of val-
ues of the input and internal parameters. For example, does the average number in the queue of a single
server continue to increase over time when the arrival rate is larger than the service rate?
Event Validity: The “events” of occurrences of the simulation model are compared to those of the real
system to determine if they are similar. For example, compare the number of fires in a fire department si-
mulation to the actual number of fires.
Extreme Condition Tests: The model structure and outputs should be plausible for any extreme and
unlikely combination of levels of factors in the system. For example, if in-process inventories are zero,
production output should usually be zero.
Face Validity: Individuals knowledgeable about the system are asked whether the model and/or its
behavior are reasonable. For example, is the logic in the conceptual model correct and are the model’s in-
put-output relationships reasonable.
Historical Data Validation: If historical data exist (e.g., data collected on a system specifically for
building and testing a model), part of the data is used to build the model and the remaining data are used
to determine (test) whether the model behaves as the system does. (This testing is conducted by driving
the simulation model with either samples from distributions or traces (Balci and Sargent 1982a, 1982b,
1984b).)
Historical Methods: The three historical methods of validation are rationalism, empiricism, and posi-
tive economics. Rationalism assumes that everyone knows whether the clearly stated underlying assump-
tions of a model are true. Logic deductions are used from these assumptions to develop the correct (valid)
model. Empiricism requires every assumption and outcome to be empirically validated. Positive econom-
ics requires only that the model be able to predict the future and is not concerned with a model’s assump-
tions or structure (causal relationships or mechanisms).
171
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 7 =====

Sargent
Internal Validity: Several replications (runs) of a stochastic model are made to determine the amount
of (internal) stochastic variability in the model. A large amount of variability (lack of consistency) may
cause the model’s results to be questionable and if typical of the problem entity, may question the appro-
priateness of the policy or system being investigated.
Multistage Validation: Naylor and Finger (1967) proposed combining the three historical methods of
rationalism, empiricism, and positive economics into a multistage process of validation. This validation
method consists of (1) developing the model’s assumptions on theory, observations, and general know-
ledge, (2) validating the model’s assumptions where possible by empirically testing them, and (3) com-
paring (testing) the input-output relationships of the model to the real system.
Operational Graphics: Values of various performance measures, e.g., the number in queue and per-
centage of servers busy, are shown graphically as the model runs through time; i.e., the dynamical beha-
viors of performance indicators are visually displayed as the simulation model runs through time to en-
sure they behave correctly.
Parameter Variability - Sensitivity Analysis: This technique consists of changing the values of the in-
put and internal parameters of a model to determine the effect upon the model’s behavior or output. The
same relationships should occur in the model as in the real system. This technique can be used qualitative-
ly—directions only of outputs—and quantitatively—both directions and (precise) magnitudes of outputs.
Those parameters that are sensitive, i.e., cause significant changes in the model’s behavior or output,
should be made sufficiently accurate prior to using the model. (This may require iterations in model de-
velopment.)
Predictive Validation: The model is used to predict (forecast) the system’s behavior, and then com-
parisons are made between the system’s behavior and the model’s forecast to determine if they are the
same. The system data may come from an operational system or be obtained by conducting experiments
on the system, e.g., field tests.
Traces: The behaviors of different types of specific entities in the model are traced (followed)
through the model to determine if the model’s logic is correct and if the necessary accuracy is obtained.
Turing Tests: Individuals who are knowledgeable about the operations of the system being modeled
are asked if they can discriminate between system and model outputs. (Schruben (1980) contains statistic-
al tests for Turing tests.)
5 DATA VALIDITY
We discuss data validity, even though it is often not considered to be part of model validation, because it
is usually difficult, time consuming, and costly to obtain appropriate, accurate, and sufficient data, and da-
ta problems are often the reason that attempts to valid a model fail. Data are needed for three purposes:
for building the conceptual model, for validating the model, and for performing experiments with the va-
lidated model. In model validation we are usually concerned only with data for the first two purposes.
To build a conceptual model we must have sufficient data on the problem entity to develop theories
that can be used to build the model, to develop mathematical and logical relationships for use in the mod-
el that will allow the model to adequately represent the problem entity for its intended purpose, and to test
the model’s underlying assumptions. In addition, behavioral data are needed on the problem entity to be
used in the operational validity step of comparing the problem entity’s behavior with the model’s beha-
vior. (Usually, this data are system input/output data.) If behavior data are not available, high model con-
fidence usually cannot be obtained because sufficient operational validity cannot be achieved.
The concerns with data are that appropriate, accurate, and sufficient data are available, and all data
transformations, such as data disaggregation, are made correctly. Unfortunately, there is not much that
can be done to ensure that the data are correct. One should develop good procedures for (1) collecting and
maintaining data, (2) testing the collected data using techniques such as internal consistency checks, and
(3) screening the data for outliers and determining if the outliers are correct. If the amount of data is large,
a database of the data should be developed and maintained.
172
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 8 =====

Sargent
6 CONCEPTUAL MODEL VALIDATION
Conceptual model validity is determining that (1) the theories and assumptions underlying the conceptual
model are correct and (2) the model’s representation of the problem entity and the model’s structure, log-
ic, and mathematical and causal relationships are “reasonable” for the intended purpose of the model. The
theories and assumptions underlying the model should be tested using mathematical analysis and statistic-
al methods on problem entity data. Examples of theories and assumptions are linearity, independence of
data, and arrivals are Poisson. Examples of applicable statistical methods are fitting distributions to data,
estimating parameter values from the data, and plotting data to determine if the data are stationary. In ad-
dition, all theories used should be reviewed to ensure they were applied correctly. For example, if a Mar-
kov chain is used, does the system have the Markov property, and are the states and transition probabili-
ties correct?
Each submodel and the overall model must be evaluated to determine if they are reasonable and cor-
rect for the intended purpose of the model. This should include determining if the appropriate detail and
aggregate relationships have been used for the model’s intended purpose, and also if appropriate structure,
logic, and mathematical and causal relationships have been used. The primary validation techniques used
for these evaluations are face validation and traces. Face validation has experts on the problem entity eva-
luate the conceptual model to determine if it is correct and reasonable for its purpose. This usually re-
quires examining the flowchart or graphical model (Sargent 1986), or the set of model equations. The use
of traces is the tracking of entities through each submodel and the overall model to determine if the logic
is correct and if the necessary accuracy is maintained. If errors are found in the conceptual model, it must
be revised and conceptual model validation performed again.
7 COMPUTERIZED MODEL VERIFICATION
Computerized model verification ensures that the computer programming and implementation of the con-
ceptual model are correct. The major factor affecting verification is whether a simulation language or a
higher level programming language such as FORTRAN, C, or C++ is used. The use of a special-purpose
simulation language generally will result in having fewer errors than if a general-purpose simulation lan-
guage is used, and using a general-purpose simulation language will generally result in having fewer er-
rors than if a general purpose higher level programming language is used. (The use of a simulation lan-
guage also usually reduces both the programming time required and the amount of flexibility.)
When a simulation language is used, verification is primarily concerned with ensuring that an error
free simulation language has been used, that the simulation language has been properly implemented on
the computer, that a tested (for correctness) pseudo random number generator has been properly imple-
mented, and that the model has been programmed correctly in the simulation language. The primary tech-
niques used to determine that the model has been programmed correctly are structured walkthroughs and
traces.
If a higher level programming language has been used, then the computer program should have been
designed, developed, and implemented using techniques found in software engineering. (These include
such techniques as object-oriented design, structured programming, and program modularity.) In this case
verification is primarily concerned with determining that the simulation functions (e.g., the time-flow me-
chanism, pseudo random number generator, and random variate generators) and the computerized (simu-
lation) model have been programmed and implemented correctly.
There are two basic approaches for testing simulation software: static testing and dynamic testing
(Fairley 1976). In static testing the computer program is analyzed to determine if it is correct by using
such techniques as structured walkthroughs, correctness proofs, and examining the structure properties of
the program. In dynamic testing the computer program is executed under different conditions and the val-
ues obtained (including those generated during the execution) are used to determine if the computer pro-
gram and its implementations are correct. The techniques commonly used in dynamic testing are traces,
investigations of input-output relations using different validation techniques, internal consistency checks,
173
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 9 =====

Sargent
and reprogramming critical components to determine if the same results are obtained. If there are a large
number of variables, one might aggregate the numerical values of some of the variables to reduce the
number of tests needed or use certain types of design of experiments (Kleijnen 1987).
It is necessary to be aware while checking the correctness of the computer program and its implemen-
tation that errors found may be caused by the data, the conceptual model, the computer program, or the
computer implementation. (See Whitner and Balci (1989) for a detailed discussion on model verification.)
8 OPERATIONAL VALIDITY
Operational validation is determining whether the simulation model’s output behavior has the accuracy
required for the model’s intended purpose over the domain of the model’s intended applicability. This is
where much of the validation testing and evaluation take place. Since the simulation model is used in op-
erational validation, any deficiencies found may be caused by what was developed in any of the steps that
are involved in developing the simulation model including developing the system’s theories or having
invalid data.
All of the validation techniques discussed in Section 4 are applicable to operational validity. Which
techniques and whether to use them objectively or subjectively must be decided by the model develop-
ment team and the other interested parties. The major attribute affecting operational validity is whether
the problem entity (or system) is observable, where observable means it is possible to collect data on the
operational behavior of the problem entity. Table 1 gives a classification of the validation techniques used
in operational validity based on the decision approach and system observable. “Comparison” means com-
paring the simulation model output behavior to either the system output behavior or another model output
behavior using graphical displays or statistical tests and procedures. “Explore model behavior” means to
examine the output behavior of the simulation model using appropriate validation techniques, including
parameter variability-sensitivity analysis. Various sets of experimental conditions from the domain of the
model’s intended applicability should be used for both comparison and exploring model behavior.
Table 1: Operational Validity Classification
Observable Non-observable
System System
• Comparison Using • Explore Model
Subjective Graphical Displays Behavior
Approach • Explore Model • Comparison to
Behavior Other Models
• Comparison Using • Comparison to
Objective Statistical Tests Other Models
Approach and Procedures Using Statistical
Tests
To obtain a high degree of confidence in a simulation model and its results, comparisons of the mod-
el’s and system’s output behaviors for several different sets of experimental conditions are usually re-
quired. Thus if a system is not observable, which is often the case, it is usually not possible to obtain a
high degree of confidence in the model. In this situation the model output behavior(s) should be explored
as thoroughly as possible and comparisons made to other valid models whenever possible.
8.1 Explore Model Behavior
The simulation model output behavior can be explored either qualitatively or quantitatively. In qualitative
analysis the directions of the output behaviors are examined and also possibly whether the magnitudes are
“reasonable.” In quantitative analysis both the directions and the precise magnitudes of the output beha-
viors are examined. Experts on the system usually know the directions and often know the “general val-
ues” of the magnitudes of the output behaviors. Many of the validation techniques given in Section 4 can
174
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 10 =====

Sargent
be used for model exploration. Parameter variability-sensitivity analysis should usually be used. Graphs
of the output data discussed in Subsection 8.2.1 below can be used to display the simulation model output
behavior. A variety of statistical approaches can be used in performing model exploration including me-
tamodeling and design of experiments. (See Kleijnen (1999) for further discussion on the use of statistical
approaches.) Numerous sets of experimental frames should be used in performing model exploration.
8.2 Comparisons of Output Behaviors
There are three basic approaches used in comparing the simulation model output behavior to either the
system output behavior or another model output behavior: (1) the use of graphs to make a subjective deci-
sion, (2) the use of confidence intervals to make an objective decision, and (3) the use of hypothesis tests
to make an objective decision. It is preferable to use confidence intervals or hypothesis tests for the com-
parisons because these allow for objective decisions. However, it is often not possible in practice to use
either one of these two approaches because (a) the statistical assumptions required cannot be satisfied or
only with great difficulty (assumptions usually required are data independence and normality) and/or (b)
there is an insufficient quantity of system data available, which causes the statistical results to be “mea-
ningless” (e.g., the length of a confidence interval developed in the comparison of the system and simula-
tion model means is to large for any practical usefulness). As a result, the use of graphs is the most com-
monly used approach for operational validity. Each of these three approaches is discussed below using
system output data (Note: these same approaches can also use with output data from a validated model in-
stead of system output data when appropriate).
8.2.1 Graphical Comparisons of Data
The behavior data of the simulation model and the system are graphed for various sets of experimental
conditions to determine if the model’s output behavior has sufficient accuracy for the model’s intended
purpose. Three types of graphs are used: histograms, box (and whisker) plots, and behavior graphs using
scatter plots. (See Sargent (1996a, 2001b) for a thorough discussion on the use of these for model valida-
tion.) Examples of a histogram and a box plot are given in Figures 4 and 5, respectively; both taken from
Lowery (1996). Examples of behavior graphs, taken from Anderson and Sargent (1974), are given in Fig-
ures 6 and 7. A variety of graphs are required that use different types of (1) measures such as the mean,
variance, maximum, distribution, and times series of the variables, and (2) relationships between (a) two
measures of a single variable (see Figure 6) and (b) measures of two variables (see Figure 7). It is impor-
tant that appropriate measures and relationships be used in validating a simulation model and that they be
determined with respect to the model’s intended purpose. See Anderson and Sargent (1974) and Lowery
(1996) for examples of sets of graphs used in the validation of two different simulation models.
Hospital Study
40
30
20
10
0
Figure 4: Histogram of Hospital Data Figure 5: Box Plot of Hospital Data
0.49 0.59 0.69 0.79 0.89 0.99
24 Week Average
ycneuqerF Model
System
175
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 11 =====

Sargent
Figure 6: Reaction Time Figure 7: Disk
These graphs can be used in model validation in different ways. First, the model development team
can use the graphs in the model development process to make a subjective judgment on whether a simula-
tion model posses sufficient accuracy for it’s intend purpose. Second, they can be used in the face validity
technique where experts are asked to make subjective judgments on whether a simulation model pos-
sesses sufficient accuracy for its intended purpose. Third, the graphs can be used in Turing tests. Fourth,
the graphs can be used in different ways in IV&V. We note that the data in these graphs do not need to be
independence nor satisfy any statistical distribution requirement such as normality of the data (Sargent
1996a, 2001a, 2001b).
8.2.2 Confidence Intervals
Confidence intervals (c.i.), simultaneous confidence intervals (s.c.i.), and joint confidence regions (j.c.r.)
can be obtained for the differences between means, variances, and distributions of different simulation
model and system output variables for each set of experimental conditions. These c.i., s.c.i., and j.c.r. can
be used as the model range of accuracy for model validation.
To construct the model range of accuracy, a statistical procedure containing a statistical technique and
a method of data collection must be developed for each set of experimental conditions and for each varia-
ble of interest. The statistical techniques used can be divided into two groups: (1) univariate statistical
techniques and (2) multivariate statistical techniques. The univariate techniques can be used to develop
c.i., and with the use of the Bonferroni inequality (Law 2007) s.c.i. The multivariate techniques can be
used to develop s.c.i. and j.c.r. Both parametric and nonparametric techniques can be used.
The method of data collection must satisfy the underlying assumptions of the statistical technique be-
ing used. The standard statistical techniques and data collection methods used in simulation output analy-
176
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 12 =====

Sargent
sis (Banks et al. 2005, Law 2007) can be used in developing the model range of accuracy, e.g., the me-
thods of replication and (nonoverlapping) batch means.
It is usually desirable to construct the model range of accuracy with the lengths of the c.i. and s.c.i.
and the sizes of the j.c.r. as small as possible. The shorter the lengths or the smaller the sizes, the more
useful and meaningful the model range of accuracy will usually be. The lengths and the sizes (1) are af-
fected by the values of confidence levels, variances of the model and system output variables, and sample
sizes, and (2) can be made smaller by decreasing the confidence levels or increasing the sample sizes. A
tradeoff needs to be made among the sample sizes, confidence levels, and estimates of the length or sizes
of the model range of accuracy, i.e., c.i., s.c.i. or j.c.r. Tradeoff curves can be constructed to aid in the tra-
deoff analysis.
Details on the use of c.i., s.c.i., and j.c.r. for operational validity, including a general methodology,
are contained in Balci and Sargent (1984b).
8.2.3 Hypothesis Tests
Hypothesis tests can be used in the comparison of means, variances, distributions, and time series of the
output variables of a model and a system for each set of experimental conditions to determine if the simu-
lation model’s output behavior has an acceptable range of accuracy. An acceptable range of accuracy is
the amount of accuracy that is required of a model to be valid for its intended purpose.
The first step in hypothesis testing is to state the hypotheses to be tested:
• H Model is valid for the acceptable range of accuracy under the set of experimental conditions.
0
• H Model is invalid for the acceptable range of accuracy under the set of experimental conditions.
1
Two types of errors are possible in testing hypotheses. The first, or type I error, is rejecting the validity of
a valid model and the second, or type II error, is accepting the validity of an invalid model. The probabili-
ty of a type I error, α, is called model builder’s risk, and the probability of type II error, β, is called model
user’s risk (Balci and Sargent 1981). In model validation, the model user’s risk is extremely important
and must be kept small. Thus both type I and type II errors must be carefully considered when using hy-
pothesis testing for model validation.
The amount of agreement between a model and a system can be measured by a validity measure, λ,
which is chosen such that the model accuracy or the amount of agreement between the model and the sys-
tem decrease as the value of the validity measure increases. The acceptable range of accuracy can be used
to determine an acceptable validity range, 0 < λ < λ*.
The probability of acceptance of a model being valid, P , can be examined as a function of the validi-
a
ty measure by using an operating characteristic curve (Johnson 2005). Figure 8 contains three different
operating characteristic curves to illustrate how the sample size of observations affects P as a function of
a
λ. As can be seen, an inaccurate model has a high probability of being accepted if a small sample size of
observations is used, and an accurate model has a low probability of being accepted if a large sample size
of observations is used.
The location and shape of the operating characteristic curves are a function of the statistical tech-
nique being used, the value of α chosen for λ = 0, i.e. α*, and the sample size of observations. Once the
operating characteristic curves are constructed, the intervals for the model user’s risk β(λ) and the model
builder’s risk α can be determined for a given λ* as follows:
α* < model builder’s risk α < (1 - β*)
0 < model user’s risk β(λ) < β*.
Thus there is a direct relationship among the builder’s risk, model user’s risk, acceptable validity range,
and the sample size of observations. A tradeoff among these must be made when using hypothesis tests.
177
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 13 =====

Sargent
Figure 8: Operating Characteristic Curves
Details of the methodology for using hypotheses tests in comparing the model’s and system’s output
data for model validations are given in Balci and Sargent (1981). Examples of the application of this me-
thodology in the testing of output means for model validation are given in Balci and Sargent (1982a,
1982b, 1983).
9 DOCUMENTATION
Documentation on model verification and validation is usually critical in convincing users of the “cor-
rectness” of a model and its results, and should be included in the simulation model documentation. (See
Gass (1984) for a general discussion on documentation of computer-based models.) Both detailed and
summary documentation are desired. The detailed documentation should include specifics on the tests,
evaluations made, data, results, etc. The summary documentation should contain a separate evaluation ta-
ble for data validity, conceptual model validity, computer model verification, operational validity, and an
overall summary. See Table 2 for an example of an evaluation table of conceptual model validity. (For
examples of two other evaluation tables, see Sargent (1994, 1996b).) The columns of Table 2 are self-
explanatory except for the last column, which refers to the confidence the evaluators have in the results or
conclusions. These are often expressed as low, medium, or high.
Table 2: Evaluation Table for Conceptual Model Validity
178
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 14 =====

Sargent
10 RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE
This author recommends that, as a minimum, the following eight steps be performed in model validation:
1. An agreement be made prior to developing the model between (a) the model development team
and (b) the model sponsors and (if possible) the users that specifies the basic validation approach
and a minimum set of specific validation techniques to be used in the validation process.
2. Specify the amount of accuracy required of the simulation model’s output variables of interest for
the model’s intended application prior to starting the development of the model or very early in
the model development process.
3. Test, wherever possible, the assumptions and theories underlying the simulation model.
4. In each model iteration, at least perform face validity on the conceptual model.
5. In each model iteration, at least explore the simulation model’s behavior using the computerized
model.
6. In at least the last model iteration, make comparisons, if possible, between the simulation model
and system behavior (output) data for at least a few sets of experimental conditions, and prefera-
bly for several sets.
7. Develop validation documentation for inclusion in the simulation model documentation.
8. If the simulation model is to be used over a period of time, develop a schedule for periodic review
of the model’s validity.
Some simulation models are developed for repeated use. A procedure for reviewing the validity of
these models over their life cycles needs to be developed, as specified in Step 8. No general procedure can
be given, as each situation is different. For example, if no data were available on the system when a simu-
lation model was initially developed and validated, then revalidation of the model should take place prior
to each usage of the model if new data or system understanding has occurred since the last validation.
11 ACCREDITATION
The U. S. A. Department of Defense (DoD) has moved to accrediting simulation models. They define ac-
creditation as the “official certification that a model, simulation, or federation of models and simulations
and its associated data are acceptable for use for a specific application” (DoDI 5000.61 2003). The evalu-
ation for accreditation is usually conducted by a third (independent) party, is subjective, and often in-
cludes not only verification and validation but items such as documentation and how user friendly the si-
mulation is. The acronym VV&A is used for Verification, Validation, and Accreditation. (Other areas and
fields sometimes use the term “Certification” to certify that a model (or product) conforms to a specified
set of characteristics (See Balci (2003) for further discussion.).)
12 SUMMARY
Model verification and validation are critical in the development of a simulation model. Unfortunately,
there is no set of specific tests that can easily be applied to determine the “correctness” of a model. Fur-
thermore, no algorithm exists to determine what techniques or procedures to use. Every simulation project
presents a new and unique challenge to the model development team.
In this paper we discussed ‘practical approaches’ to verification and validation of simulation models.
For a discussion on the philosophy of model validation, see Kleindorfer and Ganeshan (1993).
There is considerable literature on model verification and validation; see e.g. Balci and Sargent
(1984a). Beyond the references already cited above, there are conference tutorials and papers (e.g. Carson
(2002), Law (2008), Sargent (1979, 1984b, 1985, 1990, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2007)), journal articles (e.g.
Gass (1983), Gass and Thompson (1980), Landry, Malouin, and Oral (1983)), discussions in textbooks
(e.g., Banks et al. (2005), Law (2007), Robinson (2004), Zeigler (1976)), U.S.A. Government Reports
(e.g., U. S. General Accounting Office (1987)), and a book by Knepell and Arangno (1993) that can be
used to further your knowledge on model verification and validation.
179
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 15 =====

Sargent
Research continues on these topics. This includes such items as advisory systems (e.g. Balci (2001)
and Rao and Sargent (1988)), new approaches and procedures (e.g. Balci 2004, Sargent 2008), and new
techniques (e.g. Balci et al. (2002), Rueβ and de Moura (2003)). See Sargent et al. (2000) for a discussion
on research directions.
REFERENCES
Cheng, R. C. H. 1994. Selecting input models. In Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference,
ed. J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, D. A. Sadowski, and A. F. Seila, 184–191. Piscataway, New Jersey:
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.
Anderson, H. A. and R. G. Sargent. 1974. An investigation into scheduling for an interactive computer
system. IBM Journal of Research and Development 18 (2): 125-137.
Balci, O. 1989. How to assess the acceptability and credibility of simulation results. In Proceedings of the
1989 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. E. A. MacNair, K. J. Musselman, and P. Heidelberger, 62-
71. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Balci, O. 2001. A methodology for certification of modeling and simulation applications. ACM Trans. on
Modeling and Computer Simulation 11 (4), 352-377.
Balci, O. 2003. Validation, verification, and certification of modeling and simulation applications. In
Proceedings of the 2003 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. S. Chick, P. J. Sanchez, E. Ferrin, and D.
J.Morrice, 150-158. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Balci, O. 2004. Quality assessment, verification, and validation of modeling and simulation applications.
In Proceedings of the 2004 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. R. G. Ingalls, M. D. Rossetti, J. S.
Smith, and H. A. Peters, 122-129. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Balci, O., R. E. Nance, J. D. Arthur, and W. F. Ormsby. 2002. Expanding our horizons in verification, va-
lidation, and accreditation research and practice. In Proceedings of the 2001 Winter Simulation Con-
ference, ed. B. A. Peters, J. S. Smith, D. J Medeiros, and M. W. Rohrer, 653-663. Piscataway, New
Jersey: IEEE.
Balci, O. and R. G. Sargent. 1981. A methodology for cost-risk analysis in the statistical validation of si-
mulation models. Comm. of the ACM 24 (6): 190-197.
Balci, O. and R. G. Sargent. 1982a. Validation of multivariate response simulation models by using Ho-
telling’s two-sample T2 test. Simulation 39(6): 185-192.
Balci, O. and R. G. Sargent. 1982b. Some examples of simulation model validation using hypothesis test-
ing. In Proceedings of the 1982 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. H. J. Highland, Y. W. Chao, and
O. S. Madrigal, 620-629. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Balci, O. and R. G. Sargent. 1983. Validation of multivariate response trace-driven simulation models. In
Performance 83, ed. Agrawada and Tripathi, 309-323. North Holland.
Balci, O. and R. G. Sargent. 1984a. A bibliography on the credibility assessment and validation of simu-
lation and mathematical models. Simuletter 15 (3): 15-27.
Balci, O. and R. G. Sargent. 1984b. Validation of simulation models via simultaneous confidence inter-
vals. American Journal of Mathematical and Management Science 4 (3): 375-406.
Banks, J., J. S. Carson II, B. L. Nelson, and D. Nicol. 2005. Discrete-event system simulation. 4th ed. En-
glewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Banks, J., D. Gerstein, and S. P. Searles. 1988. Modeling processes, validation, and verification of com-
plex simulations: a survey. In Methodology and Validation, Simulation Series, Vol. 19, No. 1, The
Society for Computer Simulation, 13-18. San Diego, CA: Society for Modeling and Simulation Inter-
national.
Carson II, J. S. 2002. Model verification and validation. In Proceedings of the 2002 Winter Simulation
Conference, ed. E. Yucesan, C.-H. Chen, J.L. Snowdon, J. M. Charnes, 52-58. Piscataway, New Jer-
sey: IEEE.
DoDI 5000.61. 2003. DoD modeling and simulation verification, validation, and accreditation, May 13,
2003.
180
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 16 =====

Sargent
Fairley, R. E. 1976. Dynamic testing of simulation software. In Proceedings of the 1976 Summer Com-
puter Simulation Conference, 40-46. San Diego, CA: Society for Modeling and Simulation Interna-
tional.
Gass, S. I. 1983. Decision-aiding models: validation, assessment, and related issues for policy analysis.
Operations Research 31 (4): 601-663.
Gass, S. I. 1984. Documenting a computer-based model. Interfaces 14 (3): 84-93.
Gass, S. I. 1993. Model accreditation: a rationale and process for determining a numerical rating. Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research 66 (2): 250-258.
Gass, S. I. and L. Joel. 1987. Concepts of model confidence. Computers and Operations Research 8 (4):
341-346.
Gass, S. I. and B. W. Thompson. 1980. Guidelines for model evaluation: an abridged version of the U. S.
general accounting office exposure draft. Operations Research 28 (2): 431-479.
Johnson, R. A. 2005. Miller and Freund’s probability and statistics for engineers, 7th ed. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kleijnen, J. P. C. 1987. Statistical tools for simulation practitioners. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Kleijnen, J. P. C. 1999. Validation of models: statistical techniques and data availability. In Proceedings
of the 1999 Simulation Conference, ed. P. A. Farrington, H. Black Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, and G.
W. Evans, 647-654. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Kleindorfer, G. B. and R. Ganeshan. 1993. The philosophy of science and validation in simulation. In
Proceedings of the 1993 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. G. W. Evans, M. Mollaghasemi, E. C.
Russell, and W. E. Biles, 50-57. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Knepell, P. L. and D. C. Arangno. 1993. Simulation validation: a confidence assessment methodology.
IEEE Computer So-ciety Press.
Landry, M, J. L. Malouin, and M. Oral. 1983. Model validation in operations research. European Journal
of Operational Re-search 14: 207-220.
Law, A. M. 2007. Simulation modeling and analysis. 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Law, A. M. 2008. How to build valid and credible simulation models. In Proceedings of the 2008 Winter
Simulation Conference, ed. S. J. Mason, R. Hill, L. Moench, and O. Rose, 39-47. Piscataway, New
Jersey: IEEE.
Lowery, J. 1996. Design of hospital admissions scheduling system using simulation. In Proceedings of
the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, and J. J.
Swain, 1199-1204. Pisctaway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Naylor, T. H. and J. M. Finger. 1967. Verification of computer simulation models. Management Science
14 (2): B92-B101.
Rao, M. J. and R. G. Sargent. 1988. An advisory system for operational validity. In Artificial Intelligence
and Simulation: the Diversity of Applications, ed. T. Hensen, 245-250. San Diego, CA: Society for
Computer Simulation.
Robinson, S. 2004. Simulation: The Practice of Model Development and Use. Chichester, West Sussex,
England: John Wiley.
Rueβ, H. and L. de Moura. 2003. From simulation to verification (and back). In Proceedings of the 2003
Winter Simu-lation Conference, ed. S. Chick, P. J. Sanchez, E. Ferrin, and D. J. Morrice, 888-896.
Piscataway, New Jesey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 1979. Validation of simulation models. In Proceedings of the 1979 Winter Simulation
Conference, ed. H. J. Highland, M. F. Spiegel, and R. E. Shannon, 497-503. Piscataway, New Jersey:
IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 1981. An assessment procedure and a set of criteria for use in the evaluation of compute-
rized models and computer-based modeling tools. Final Technical Report RADC-TR-80-409, U.S.
Air Force.
Sargent, R. G. 1982. Verification and validation of simulation Models. Chapter IX in Progress in Model-
ling and Simulation, ed. F. E. Cellier, 159-169. London: Academic Press.
181
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 17 =====

Sargent
Sargent, R. G. 1984a. Simulation model validation. Chapter 19 in Simulation and Model-Based Metho-
dologies: An Integrative View, ed. T. I. Oren, B. P. Zeigler, and M. S. Elzas, 537-555. Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Sargent, R. G. 1984b. A tutorial on verification and validation of simulation models. In Proceedings of
the 1984 Win-ter Simulation Conference, ed. S. Sheppard, U. W. Pooch, and C. D. Pegden, 114-121.
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 1985. An expository on verification and validation of simulation models. In Proceedings of
the 1985 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. D. T. Gantz, G. C. Blais, and S. L. Solomon, 15-22. Pis-
cataway, NJ: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 1986. The use of graphical models in model validation. In Proceedings of the 1986 Winter
Simulation Conference, ed. J. R. Wil-son, J. O. Henriksen, and S. D. Roberts, 237-241. Piscataway,
New Jersey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 1990. Validation of mathematical models. In Proc. of Geoval-90: Symposium on Valida-
tion of Geosphere Flow and Transport Models, 571-579. Stockholm, Sweden.
Sargent, R. G. 1994. Verification and validation of simulation models. In Proc. 1994 Winter Simulation
Conference, ed. J. D. Tew, M. S. Manivannan, D. A. Sadowski, and A. F. Seila, 77-87. Piscataway,
New Jersey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 1996a. Some subjective validation methods using graphical displays of data. In Proceed-
ings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, and
J. J. Swain, 345-351. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 1996b. Verifying and validating simulation models. In Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Si-
mulation Conference, ed. J. M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, and J. J. Swain, 55-64. Pisca-
taway, New Jer-sey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 2000. Verification, validation, and accreditation of simulation models. In Proceedings of
the 2000 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. A. Joines, R. R. Barton, K. Kang, and P. A. Fishwick,
50-59. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 2001a. Graphical displays of simulation model data as statistical references. In Simulation
2001 (Proc. of the 4th St. Petersburg Workshop on Simulation), ed. S. M. Ermakor, Yu. N. Kashta-
nov, and V. B. Melas, 109-118. Publisher: Chemistry Research Institute of St. Petersburg University.
Sargent, R. G. 2001b. Some approaches and paradigms for verifying and validating simulation models. In
Proceedings of the 2001 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. B. A. Peters, J. S. Smith, D. J Medeiros,
and M. W. Rohrer, 106-114. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 2003. Verification and validation of simulation models. In Proc. 2003 Winter Simulation
Conference, ed. S. Chick, P. J. Sanchez, E. Ferrin, and D. J. Morrice, 37-48. Piscataway, New Jersey:
IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 2005. Verification and validation of simulation models. In Proc. 2005 Winter Simulation
Conference, ed. M. E. Kuhl, N. M. Steiger, F. B. Armstrong, and J. A. Joines, 130-143. Piscataway,
New Jersey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 2007. Verification and validation of simulation models. In Proceedings of the 2007 Winter
Simulation Conference, ed. S. G. Henderson, B. Biller, M.-H. Hsieh, J. D. Tew, and R. R. Barton,
124-137. Piscata-way, New Jersey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G. 2008. A new statistical procedure for validation of simulation models. International Feder-
ation of Operational Research Societies Conference, Sandton, South Africa, July 2008.
Sargent, R. G. 2009. Verification and validation of simulation models. In Proceedings of the 2009 Winter
Simulation Conference, ed. M. D. Rossetti, R. R. Hill, B. Johansson, A. Dunkin, and R. G. Ingalls,
162-176. Piscata-way, New Jersey: IEEE.
Sargent, R. G., P. A. Glasow, J. P. C. Kleijnen, A. M. Law, I. McGregor, and S. Youngblood. 2000. Stra-
tegic directions in verification, validation, and accreditation research. In Proceedings of the 2000
Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. A. Joines, R. R. Barton, K. Kang, and P. A. Fishwick, 909-916.
Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
182
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 18 =====

Sargent
Schlesinger, S. 1979 el al. Terminology for model credibility. Simulation 32 (3): 103-104.
Schruben, L.W. 1980. Establishing the credibility of simulation models. Simulation 34 (3): 101-105. U. S.
General Accounting Office, PEMD-88-3. 1987. DOD simulations: improved assessment procedures
would increase the credibility of results.
Whitner, R. G. and O. Balci. 1989.Guideline for selecting and using simulation model verification techni-
ques. In Proceedings of the 1989 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. E. A. MacNair, K. J. Mussel-
man, and P. Heidelberger, 559-568. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Wood, D. O. 1986. MIT model analysis program: what we have learned about policy model review. In
Proceedings of the 1986 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. J. R. Wilson, J. O. Henriksen, and S. D.
Roberts, 248-252. Piscataway, New Jersey: IEEE.
Zeigler, B. P. 1976. Theory of modelling and simulation. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY
ROBERT G. SARGENT is a Professor Emeritus of Syracuse University. He received his education at
The University of Michigan. Dr. Sargent has served his profession in numerous ways including being the
General Chair of the 1977 Winter Simulation Conference, serving on the WSC Board of Directors for ten
years and chairing the Board for two years, being a Department Editor for the Communications of the
ACM, holding the Presidency and other offices of what is now the INFORMS Simulation Society, and
serving as Founding President of the WSC Foundation. He has received several awards and honors for his
professional contributions including the INFORMS Simulation Society Lifetime Professional Achieve-
ment Award and their Distinguished Service Award, a WSC 40th anniversary landmark paper award, ser-
vice awards from ACM and IIE, and becoming a Fellow of INFORMS. His current research interests in-
clude the methodology areas of modeling and of discrete event simulation, model validation, and
performance evaluation. Professor Sargent has published extensively and is listed in Who’s Who in
America and in Who’s Who in the World. His e-mail is <rsargent@syr.edu>.
183
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Georgia. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 14:20:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
