===== PAGE 1 =====

PDF Download
1097064.1097099.pdf
24 February 2026
Total Citations: 44
. Total Downloads: 772
.
Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1097064.1097099 .
.
Published: 04 November 2005
.
. .
ARTICLE .
Citation in BibTeX format
Contraflow network reconfiguration for evacuation planning: a
.
.
summary of results CIKM05: Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management
November 4 - 5, 2005
SANGHO KIM, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN, United States Bremen, Germany
.
. .
SHASHI SHEKHAR, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN, United States Conference Sponsors:
SIGIR
.
.
.
Open Access Support provided by:
.
University of Minnesota Twin Cities
.
GIS '05: Proceedings of the 13th annual ACM international workshop on Geographic information systems (November 2005)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/1097064.1097099
ISBN: 1595931465
.

===== PAGE 2 =====

Contraflow Network Reconfiguration
for Evacuation Planning: A Summary of Results
Sangho Kim Shashi Shekhar
DepartmentofComputerScience DepartmentofComputerScience
UniversityofMinnesota UniversityofMinnesota
sangho@cs.umn.edu shekhar@cs.umn.edu
ABSTRACT and natural disasters. From the perspective of transporta-
tion system, colossal traffic jams during evacuation process
Contraflow,orlanereversal,isawayofincreasingoutbound
have been the main issue. In the aftermath of hurricanes
capacity of a real network by reversing the direction of in-
George in 1998 and Floyd in 1999, the transportation com-
bound roads during evacuations. The contraflow is consid-
munity observed the need for increased evacuation route
eredapotentialremedytosolvecongestionsduringevacua-
capacity as well as more accurate estimate of evacuation
tions in context of homeland security and natural disasters
time[22].
(e.g.,hurricanes). Currentlyavailablecontraflowalgorithms
Contraflow,orlanereversals,has been discussedasa po-
only tackle a single-source and multiple-destinations situa-
tential remedy to solve such tremendous congestion by in-
tion. These approaches cannot handle a multiple-sources
creasingoutboundevacuationroutecapacity. Today,eleven
problem which is harder due to conflicts across the optimal
of the 18 coastal states threatened by hurricanes consider
paths from different sources.
theuseofcontraflowaspartoftheirevacuationstrategy[21].
We formally define the evacuation situations using graph
Althoughcontraflowisprimarilyimportantforevacuations,
and flow theory and show the NP-completeness of the con-
its applications are not limited. The two center lanes of
traflowproblem. Weproposetwocapacity-awareglobalcon-
thehighwaysysteminWashington,D.C.areusedinreverse
traflow heuristics that produce contraflow configuration in
laningfashiontoefficientlycontrolcapacityformorningand
thepresenceofconflictsamongroutespreferredbydifferent
evening peak time. The utilization of contraflow after foot-
source nodes. We evaluate proposed heuristics experimen-
ball games is another typical example of a source, multiple
tallyusingsyntheticnetworksaswellasrealworlddatasets.
destinations situation.
In addition, we provide algebraic cost model. Experimen-
In spite of its importance and various applications, re-
tal results show that our contraflow heuristics can reduce
searchers have yet to address the contraflow problem from
evacuation time by 30% or more.
a computational perspective. Computerized contraflow de-
sign may help not only developing the optimized network
Categories andSubject Descriptors
configuration but also quantifying the evacuation time of
F.2.0 [Theory of Computation]: Analysis of Algorithms the result network.
and Problem Complexity—General Thus,weformulatethecontraflowproblemwiththehelp
of graph and flow theory. With a given evacuation situa-
General Terms tion using a directed and capacitated graph with multiple
sources and multiple destinations, we want to find a recon-
Algorithms,Experimentation figured network by contraflow with the objective of mini-
mizing evacuation time. In addition to the problem formu-
Keywords lation, we conjecture that the contraflow problem is NP-
complete and provide proof outline. The understanding of
contraflow,lanereversal,evacuationplanning,timeexpanded
NP-completeness on the problem is a stepping stone to the
graph, combinatorial optimization,simulated annealing
application of combinatorial optimizationtechniques to the
contraflow problem.
1. INTRODUCTION
To our knowledge, algorithms described in [14] are the
Evacuationplanningiscurrentlyanissueofmajorimpor- only ones tackling the contraflow problem. In their evacua-
tanceduetotheincreasingrisksbothfromterroristattacks tion modeling, an evacuation zone consists of a source and
multiple destinations. Their solution is reduced to finding
theoptimalpathsfromthesinglesourcetothedestinations
and overlaying them. This approach is not effective when
Permissiontomake digitalorhard copiesofallorpart ofthisworkfor thereareoneormorespecificdestinationsforevacuees,who
personalorclassroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesare arelocatedatmultiplenodesinthetransportationnetwork.
notmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopies
The approach breaks down due to conflicts across the opti-
bearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.Tocopyotherwise,to
republish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecific mal paths from different sources.
permissionand/orafee. Ontheotherhand,wepresentcapacity-awareglobalcon-
GIS’05,NNoovveemmbbeerr 44,-52,0 20050,5B, rBemreemne,nG, eGrmeramnya.ny. traflowplanningheuristicsthatcanproducecontraflownet-
Copyright2005ACM1-59593-146-5/05/0011...$5.00.
250

===== PAGE 3 =====

{40,40} {0,10}
work configuration in the presence of multiple sources with (1,3)
A B
conflicting paths to destinations. Our first approach is Flip
(1,4)
High Flow Edge (FHFE) which flips edges with priorities (1,2)
(1,3)
and produces an appropriate level of result quality with
fast running time. Our second approach is based on Sim- (1,2) (1,2) E {0,−}
ulated Annealing (SA) which aggressively improves evacu-
ation time by escaping local minima in an iterative way. (4,1)
Each approach is evaluated and examined with both syn- (1,2) (4,1)
C D
thetictransportationnetworksforscalabilitytestaswellas
(1,3)
a nuclear power plant failure scenario in Monticello, Min- {20,20} {0,10}
nesota, U.S.. Both real and synthetic datasets show that
{initial occupancy, vertex capacity}
the evacuation time of our FHFE is close to that of the SA (travel time, edge capacity)
in spite of its fast running time. In addition, our heuristics Evacuation Time: 22
can reduce evacuation time by a third.
Therestofthepaperisorganizedasfollows. Section2for- Figure 1: Graph Representation of an Evacuation
mulatesthecontraflowproblemandshowsNP-completeness Situation
of the contraflow problem. Section 3 presents related work.
In Section 4, we describe the two heuristics. Section 5 {4 A 0,40} (1,7) {0 B ,10} {4 A 0,40} (1,7) {0 B ,10}
presentsexperimentsetupinformationandevaluationofthe (1,5) (1,5)
approaches. Section6discussesrelatedknowledgetounder-
standthecontraflowproblem. Finally,section7summarizes (1,4) E {0,−} (1,4) E {0,−}
and concludes with a discussionabout future work. (4,2) (4,2)
C (1,5) D C (1,5) D
{20,20} {0,10} {20,20} {0,10}
2. PROBLEMDEFINITION
Network Configuration 1 Network Configuration 2
Section 2 consists of two subsections. The first subsec- Evacuation Time: 11 Evacuation Time: 14
tion formulates the contraflow problem and gives an illus-
trative example. The second subsection discusses the NP- Figure 2: Two Possible Contraflow Configurations
completeness of the contraflow problem. from Figure 1
2.1 Problem Formulation
Weunderstandtheevacuationplanningasaprocesstore- highway segment between cities A and B has travel time 1
moveresidentsinadangerousareatosafeplacesasquickly and capacity3. If we assumethat a timeunit is 5 minutes,
as possible. It is necessary to represent the situation with it takes 5 minutes for evacuees to travel from A to B and
amathematicalgraphstructure. Let G(V,E)be adirected maximum3evacueescansimultaneouslytravelthroughthe
network with V, the set of vertices and E, the set of edges. edge. Vertices B and D have no initial occupancy and only
Eachvertexhasaninitialoccupancyvalue,thatis,thenum- workastransshipmentvertices. Ifweapplyaminimumcost
ber ofresidents to evacuate andvertex capacity. Eachedge flow algorithmto this configuration, evacuation time is 22.
also has an edge capacity and constant travel time. The Figure2showstwopossiblecontraflowconfigurationsbased
evacuation situation can have multiple source vertices and onthegraphinFigure1. Allthetwo-wayedgesusedinthe
destinationvertices. Evacuation time is defined as a period original configuration are merged by capacity and directed
fromthemomentwhenafirstevacueeleavesasourcevertex in favor of increasing outbound evacuation capacity. There
to the moment when a last evacuee arrives at a destination aretwocandidateconfigurationsthatdifferinthedirection
vertex. We want to find a reconfigured network by con- ofedgesbetweenverticesBandD.Ifweapplytheminimum
traflow with the objective of minimizing evacuation time. cost flow algorithm to both configurations, the left configu-
The following is the summary of our contraflow problem. rationhasevacuationtime11,whiletherightconfiguration
has evacuation time 14. We can observe that both config-
Given: 1. Transportation network, directed graph G(V, E) urations not only reduce but also differ in evacuation time.
2. Each vertex has initial occupancy and capacity. Eventhoughthetimedifferenceisjust3inthisexample,the
3. Each edge has capacity and travel time. difference maybe significantlydifferent in caseof a compli-
4. Source and destination vertices. catedrealnetwork. Thisexampleillustratestheimportance
Find: Contraflow network configuration ofchoiceamongpossiblenetworkconfigurations. Moreover,
Objective: Minimize evacuation time. we have to know that there are critical edges affecting the
Constraint: evacuation time such as edge (B, D) in Figure 2.
1. Travel time and capacity are constant. In addition, we can identify some drawbacks of existing
2. Flipping a portion of the lanes is not allowed. approach with this example. Suppose that the graph in
Figure 1 is solved by overlaying Dijkstra’s shortest paths.
Figure 1 illustrates a simple evacuation situation on a One path is A, B, and E and the other path is C, D, B
transportation network. Each vertex represents a city with andE.Thus,theresultingpathsdonotutilizealltheedges
initial occupancy and its capacity. City A has 40 people effectively because the solution does not consider flow and
and also capacity 40. Vertices A and C are modeled as capacityofthegivengraph. Ifweassumethatthisexample
source vertices, while vertex E is modeled as a destination isamultiple-sourcesandmultiple-destinations(e.g.,E’,E”)
vertex (e.g., shelter). Each edge represents a road between problem, it is possible that two paths, A-B-D-E’ and C-D-
two cities with travel time and its capacity. For example, a B-E”, may conflict on the edge (B, D).
251

===== PAGE 4 =====

{0,−} {0,−} {0,−} {0,−}
We made two assumptions in our evacuation modeling.
First,weassumethatedgetraveltimeandcapacityarecon- L
2n
a
d
yer
u1 u1 u2 u2 u3 u3 u4 u4
stant. In reality, travel time of an edge is not fixed as con- C D o es m ti p n o a n ti e o n n t (1,1) (1,1) (1,1) (1,1) (1,1) (1,1) (1,1) (1,1)
stant, but may be density dependent. Incorporating micro- L
1s
a
t
yer
u1 u1 u2 u2 u3 u3 u4 u4
scopictrafficmodelsintoourheuristicshastradeoffbetween
Flipping (0,1) (0,1) (0,1) (0,1) (0,1) (0,1)
performance and model realism. Second, we only consider Component
reversingwholelanesforsimplicity. Inanactualimplemen- C So o u m rc p e onent s1 {1,1} s2 {1,1}
tationofcontraflow,itispossibletoreversesomeportionof
lanes.
Figure 3: CONTRAFLOW instance resulting from
2.2 HowHard IsTheContraflowProblem? 3SAT instance in which U =
As of the editing time of this paper, we conjecture that
thecontraflowproblemisNP-complete. Thesketchofproof
outline is described in this section. In general, the process
ofdevisinganNP-completenessproofforadecisionproblem
Π consists of the following four steps[8].
1. Showing that Π is in NP,
2. Selecting a known NP-complete problem Π′,
3. Constructing a transformation f from Π′ to Π, and
4. Proving that f is a (polynomial) transformation.
Inourprocessofproof,weselecttheknownNP-complete
problem as 3-SATISFIABILITY (3SAT) problem which is
almost the root of other NP-complete problems and is de-
rivedfromSATISFIABILITYproblemwhoseNP-completeness
isprovenbyCook[8]. The3SATproblemisspecifiedasfol-
lows:
3SAT
INSTANCE: Collection C = c ,c ,...,c of clauses on a
1 2 m
finite set U of variables such that |c | = 3 for 1 ≤ i ≤ m.
i
QUESTION: Is there a truth assignment for U that
satisfiesall the clauses in C?
TheEVAC-TIME usedinthedefinitionofCONTRAFLOW
isa polynomialfunction thatcan calculateevacuation time
ofagivengraph. Forsimplicity,eachedgeinanundirected
graph G should be flipped in either way.
CONTRAFLOW
INSTANCE: An undirected graph G = (V, E) with
initialoccupancy o(v) ∈ Z+ (where Z+ denotes the positive
integers) for some v ∈ V, destinationvertices for some v ∈ V,
capacityc(e) ∈ Z+ and travel time t(e) ∈ Z+ for each e ∈ E,
a directed graph G’ = (V, E’) and evacuation time bound
B ∈ Z+.
QUESTION: Is there a function f: e → [{u,v}, {v,u}]
for each e ∈ E where {u,v} or {v,u} is a directed edge in E’
such that EVAC-TIME(G’)≤ B?
Conjecture 1. CONTRAFLOW is NP-complete.
Proof: ItiseasytoseethatCONTRAFLOW∈NP,since
anondeterministicalgorithmneedonlyguessanewdirected
graph G’ by flipping all edges randomly and check in poly-
nomial time that G’ has evacuation time B or less.
Wetransform3SATtoCONTRAFLOW.LetU={u ,u ,
1 2
...,u } and C = {c ,c ,...,c } be any instance of 3SAT. We
n 1 2 m
must construct a graph G’ = (V, E’) and a positive integer
BsuchthatG’hasanevacuationtimeBorlessifandonly
if C is satisfiable.
The construction consists of a source component, a des-
tination component and a flipping component between the
sourceand destinationcomponents. The source component
f
u ,u ,u ,u 1 2 3 4
g
and C =
f f
u ,u ,u
1 3 4
g
,
f
u ,u ,u
1 2 4
g g
.
consists of vertices s ,s ,...,s with o(s) = 1. The desti-
1 2 m
nation component consists of two layers. First layer con-
sists of each literals and their negated literals in U (i.e.,
u ,u ,u ,u ,...,u ,u ). SecondlayerconsistsofXORofeach
1 1 2 2 n n
pair of literals (i.e., u ⊕u ,u ⊕u ,...,u ⊕u ). This XOR 1 1 2 2 n n
layerservesasadestinationnodesetintheCONTRAFLOW
problem. The two nodes in a pair (u and u ) in the first
i i
layer are connected to each XOR node (u ⊕u ) in the sec-
i i
ond layer with edges each of whose t(e) = 1 and c(e) =
1. Finally, a flipping component consists of edges with the
followingdefinition. Foreachclausec ∈C,letthethreelit-
j
eralsinc bedenotedbyx ,y ,andz . Then,theedgesare
j j j j
{s ,x }, {s ,y }, {s ,z } each of whose t(e)=0 and c(e)=1.
j j j j j j
Figure3showsanexampleofthecontraflowgraphobtained
when U = {u ,u ,u ,u } and C = {{u ,u ,u },{u ,u ,u }}.
1 2 3 4 1 3 4 1 2 4
Itiseasytoseehowtheconstructioncanbeaccomplished
inpolynomialtime. Allthatremains tobe shownisthatC
issatisfiableifandonlyifEVAC-TIME(G’)≤Bbyflipping
edges inG to prove that theabove constructionis indeed a
transformation.
→: SupposethatCissatisfiable. Ifwedefinethefunction
f ase={u,v}ifvisTRUEore={v,u}ifvisFALSE(i.e.,
draw arrow head on the TRUE node and arrow tail on the
FALSEnode). WeassumethatBisequaltothenumberof
sourcenodes. IfCissatisfiable,atleastoneedgefromeach
source node willbe directed towardthe destinationcompo-
nent. This guarantees that one occupancy in each source
node can evacuate to the destination nodes (second layer
in the destination component) with at most B evacuation
time. The worst case evacuation time B happens when all
the source nodes are pointed to one node in the first layer
of destination component.
←: Suppose that EVAC-TIME(G’) ≤ B by using the
same flipping function f described above. For each occu-
pancyineachsourcenodetoevacuatetoadestinationnode,
at least one edge from the source node should be directed
toward the first layer of destination component. This guar-
antees that C is satisfiable.
3. RELATEDWORK
Thematerialandliteratureonevacuationsingeneraland
the contraflow problem in particular have been published
from various domains including social and behavioral sci-
ences, transportation, and mathematics[5, 4]. A survey by
[22] of evacuation issues and contraflow revealed that plan-
ners have no recognized standards or guidelines for the de-
sign, operation, and location of contraflow segments. Many
states threatened by hurricanes and considering contraflow
plans were dependent on past evacuation experiences.
252

===== PAGE 5 =====

time 0 1 2 3
PastpapersandDepartmentofTransportationreports[22,
21, 20, 6] have mainly tackled the managerial and opera- {60}
(0,2/40) (0,40) (0,40) (0,40)
tional aspects of contraflow such as signal control, merging S A0 A1 A2 A3
and cost. When planners design network configuration for (0,4) (0,4) (0,4)
evacuation scenarios, they mainly depend on past experi- (0,2/3) (0,3) (0,3)
ences and guesses. Such approaches may be effective to de-
cidethedirectionofmainhighwaycontraflows. However,it
(0,10) (0,10) (0,10)
is almost impossible to depend on past experience alone to (0,20) B0 B1 B2 B3
deal with a large transportationnetwork with changing de-
mographic data and temporal factors such as construction (0,2) (0,2) (0,2)
zones. (0,2) (0,2/2) (0,2)
[14] introduced two different contraflow algorithms from
(0,20) (0,20) (0,20)
a computer science perspective. One is based on a multi- C0 C1 C2 C3
castroutingproblemandtheotherisbasedonbreadth-first
(0,2) (0,3) (0,2) (0,3)(0,2) (0,3)
graphtraversal. Thesealgorithmscanhandleonlyasingle-
coordinated incident due to conflicts of multiple optimal (0,2) (0,2) (0,2)
pathspreferredbydifferentsourcenodesincaseofmultiple-
(0,10) (0,10) (0,10)
sources and multiple-destinations evacuation model. They D0 D1 D2 D3
did not clearly describe the use of different link capacities
in the construction of optimal routes. On the other hand,
(0,3) (0,3) (0,3)
ourheuristicscanhandlethemultiple-sourcesandmultiple-
destinations evacuation situation which has inherently con-
flicting edges by more than a path from different sources. E0 E1 E2 E3
Our heuristics also explicitly use capacity as an important
factortodecideroaddirections. Ourproposedheuristicscan (1,−) (2,2/−) (3,−)
consistently reduce evacuation time by more than a third.
[cost, (flow /) edge capacity]
In addition, each heuristic has its own set of properties. {supply>0 or demand<0}
D
4. PROPOSEDHEURISTICS
{−60}
In this section, we introduce two different approaches to
generate contraflow network configurations. The first ap- Figure 4: Time Expanded Version of the Graph in
proach is tailored to the properties of contraflow and flow Figure 1
theory using a greedy algorithm, while the other approach
exploits combinatorial optimizationtechnique.
In the above definition, the (V , V ) edge is called
4.1 Flip High FlowEdge(FHFE): id,t id,t+1
aholdoveredgebecausewhenaflowrunsthroughV and
id,t
A Greedy Approach
V itmeansthatevacueescorrespondingtotheflowsize
id,t+1
are staying in the same vertex V during the time period
id
4.1.1 TimeExpandedGraphand t and t+1. On the other hand, the (V , V ) edge is
id1,t1 id2,t2
MinimumCostFlowTheory called a movement edge because evacuees corresponding to
To understand the details of FHFE algorithm, it is nec- thesizeofflowrunningthroughthetwoverticesaremoving
essary to have related background knowledge. Thus, two from V id1 to V id2 in original network G. In Figure 4, edge
important concepts are described in this subsection: time A0-A1 is an example of a holdover edge while edge A0-B1
expanded graph and minimum cost flow theory. is an example of a movement edge.
We can consider the time expanded graph as a discrete ThetimehorizonT shouldbegreaterthanthefinalevac-
time expansion of a staticnetwork flow problem[12]. Given uation time. Thus we need to set an arbitrary great value
adirectednetworkG(V,E),wecandefinethetimeexpanded to T when we run a case the first time. After the first run,
graph G in the followingway. weshouldreduceT asclosetotheevacuationtimeaspossi-
T
ble to reduce system memory and run time. The unit time
Definition 1. Let G(V,E) be a directed network with V should not necessarilybe 1 second. The choice of unit time
the set of vertices with initial occupancy V and vertex depends on the model realismand complexity.
occ
capacityV andEthesetofedgeswithtraveltimeλ It would be easy to understand if we follow the steps of
cap id1,id2
and edge capacity. The time expanded graph G (V ,E ) constructing the time expanded graph shown in Figure 4
T T T
associatedwithG(V,E)overatimehorizonT isdefinedas: derived fromFigure 1. ThegraphinFigure1 willbecalled
S is super source and D is super destination. ’originalgraph’inthisdescription. Letusstartwithshowing
V := {V | id ∈ vertex id of V and t = 0, 1, ···, T} hownodesaregeneratedintimeexpandedgraph. Eachcol-
T id,t
E := umnnodes(e.g.,A0,B0,...,E0)inthetimeexpandedgraph
T
{(V , V ) | id ∈ vertex id of V and t = 0, ···, T-1} inFigure4correspondtotheoriginalgraphatthegiventime
id,t id,t+1
∪ {(V , V ) | id1, id2 ∈ vertex id of E and t2 (e.g., time 0). Thus each node id in time expanded graph
id1,t1 id2,t2 id1,id2
= t1 + λ } (e.g.,’A0’)representsthecombinationofnodeidinoriginal
id1,id2
∪ {(S, V ) | id ∈ vertex id of V with V > 0} graph(e.g.,’A’)andtime(e.g.,time’0’). Weduplicateorig-
id,0 occ
∪ {(V , D) | id ∈ vertex id of V with V = ∞ and t = inal graph over time period from 0 to T (time horizon). At
id,t occ
1, ···, T} first,Tshouldbesetthevaluelargeenoughtoexceedevac-
253

===== PAGE 6 =====

uation time. If we get approximate evacuation time later, Edge Flow Edge Flow
the T should reduce to slightlygreater than the evacuation A-B 59 D-B 17
time to save memory and reduce running time. In the next B-E 42 B-D 15
step we add super source(id ’S’) with supply corresponding C-D 26 D-C 6
tothetotalnumberofevacueesinoriginalgraph(e.g.,40+ B-A 19 E-B 0
20 = 60) and super destination(id ’D’) with demand of the D-E 18 E-D 0
samevalue of supplyinnegative. Now wegenerated allthe
necessary nodes in time expanded graph. Table 1: Flow History of the Simple Network in
Edges are constructed in the following way. Edges from Figure 1 used for FHFE
super source ’S’ go to the nodes with initial occupancy at
{40,40} {0,10}
time 0 (e.g., A0 and C0). Edges to super destination ’D’
A (1,7) B
come from the destinations in original graph at time > 0.
Edgesconnectingtwonodeswithsamenodeidareholdover (1,5)
edges. Ifflowgoesthroughtheholdoveredge,itcorresponds
toevacueesstayingfromtimettotimet+1(e.g.,flowfrom (1,4) E {0,−}
A0 to A1 means that evacuees stay at node A from time
0 to 1). Edges connecting two nodes with different node
ids are movement edges. If flow goes through the move- (4,2)
C (1,5) D
ment edge, it corresponds to evacuees running between the
nodes (e.g., flow from A0 to B1 means that evacuees run {20,20} {0,10}
from A to B from time 0 to 1). Especially, all the holdover
{initial occupancy, vertex capacity}
edges and movement edges have 0 travel time. Only edges (travel time, edge capacity)
between destination vertices and super destination D have Evacuation Time: 11
travel time corresponding to their time. This special travel
time assignment is the key point of a time expanded graph Figure 5: Contraflowed Configuration of the Simple
and enables minimum cost flow theory. Network in Figure 1 using FHFE
Afterconstructingthegraphstructure,wesendflowfrom
S to D through time expanded graph. One example flow is
thethickedgesonthefigure. Themaximumcapacityalong 4. For the first m% of edges in the sorted edge set,
the path is 2. Thus, only two evacuees can escape through change the direction of each edge toward the direction
the path. The travel times of edges (A,B) and (B,E) in of larger flow;
original graph are respectively 1. Thus, the two evacuees 5. Apply minimum cost static flow network algorithm
shouldgothroughnodeE2ontimeexpandedgraphbecause to the configuration from step4 to get the final
it takes two time units in original graph. If we find a set of evacuation time;
shortestpathsbasedonavailablecapacity,thesetnaturally
IfweuseanexistingminimumflowprogramsuchasNET-
becomes evacuation plan because each flow amount in the
FLO[15]orRelaxIV[1],theprogramproducesaflowhistory
flowsetcorrespondstoagroupofevacueesescapinginmin-
ofeachedgeaswellasatotalcostvalue. Instep3,theflow
imal evacuation time. The description in this paragraph is
historyvalueisassignedtoeachedgeintheoriginalnetwork
basedonminimumcostflowtheory. Thesolutionproduced
configurationandedgesaresortedbyflowvaluesintheedge
by minimum cost flow algorithm is always optimal in the
set. Edgeswithmoreflowvalues tendtobemoremeaning-
sense that we can acquire the minimum evacuation time.
ful in the context of contraflow. Thus, we select only the
4.1.2 FHFE first m% of suchmeaningful edges and flipthem infavorof
increasing outbound capacity. The selection percentage m
ThebasicassumptionofFHFEheuristicisthattheedges
isadegreeofcontraflowparameter. Theeffectofparameter
more frequently used in the original network configuration
m will be examined in the evaluation section.
for an evacuation plan help determine the selection of edge
Thetimeexpandedgraphforoursimplecaseintheprob-
flippings. Therefore, we need to know the flow history of
lem definition section is illustrated in Figure 4. Table 1
theoriginalnetworkconfigurationinadvancebyapplyinga
shows the flow history generated by applying the minimum
minimum cost flow algorithm on the time expanded graph
cost flow algorithm to the time expanded graph and sorted
oftheoriginalnetworkconfiguration. Ifaflowhistoryvalue
by flow values in descending order. If we send flow through
isassignedtoeachedge,wecanchoosethedirectionoftwo-
(A,B)severaltimeinoriginalgraph(e.g.,flow2throughA-
way edges in favor of increasing outbound capacity in the
B-Eandflow1throughA-B-D-E,etc.),thecumulativevalue
following way. If one of the two-way edges in the original
will be 40 until the initial occupancy 40 empties. Someone
networkconfigurationisusedwhiletheoppositeedgeisnot
may wonder why flow between A and B is 59, not 40 in
used, wefliptheoppositeedge toincrease capacity. If both
Table 1. It is because some portion of flows oscillated be-
edgesareusedintheoriginalnetworkconfiguration,weflip
tween A and B. The flow 19 of edges (B-A) offsets flow 59
the edge which has less flow history.
of edges (A-B). Suppose m is 70%. Then, we can flip the
Algorithm FHFE; firstsevenedgesA-B,B-E,C-D,B-A,D-E,D-BandB-Din
1. Generate a time expanded graph from the given network; supportofincreasingcapacity. Especiallyforedgesbetween
2. Apply minimum cost static flow network algorithm on BandD,theflowfromDtoBisgreaterthanfromBtoD.
the time expanded graph; Thus,wefixtheedgefromDtoB.Theresultingconfigura-
3. Set flow history value from step2 to each edge and tion is shown in Figure 5. With the new configuration, the
sort edges by flow values in descending order; evacuation time is reduced from 22 to 11.
254

===== PAGE 7 =====

emit
noitaucave
25
evacuation time
20
15
local minimum
global minimum 10
5
network configurations
Figure 6: State Space Landscape of A Contraflow
Figure 7: Possible Iterations of the SA for the Sim-
Problem
ple Network used in Figure 1
For the run time analysis, suppose that there are n ver- functionvalueimprovesorthegapbetweentheoldobjective
tices and m edges in the original network G with initial functionandnewobjectivefunctionofinferiorperturbation
occupancy p. The run time of step 1 and 4 in the FHFE iswithintheformulatedprobability. Byaccepting somein-
is trivial. The step 3 takes O(mlogm) if we use well-known feriorperturbations,SAopensthepathtoaglobaloptimum.
sortingalgorithmslikeheap,mergeorquicksort. Thus,the The SA algorithmhas the following structure[18].
dominant run timepart of the FHFE is step2 and 5 where
we apply minimum cost maximum flow algorithm to the procedure SimulatedAnnealing;
time expanded network G T . Let T be the time horizon, or 1. S := S 0 ; {initialsolution}
maximumevacuationtime. Then,theupperboundofnodes 2. T := T 0 ; {initial temperature}
inG T isN =n(T +1). TheupperboundofedgesinG T is 3. iterations := i 0 ; {initial# of iterationsof inner loop, ≥ 1}
M =(n+m)T +m-Σ (i,j)∈m λ ij whereλ ij denotestravel 4. repeat
time of edge (i,j)[12]. The asymptotically fastest method 5. repeat
forfindingamin-costmax-flowisdesignedby[19]andruns 6. NewS := perturb(S);
in O(MlogN(M + NlogN)) in G . 7. if (h(NewS)<h(S)) or (random<e(h(S)−h(NewS))/T)
T
If we assume that the transportation network is sparse 8. then accept := true;
with the average degree of vertices 3, we can consider that 9. else accept := false;
m=(3*n)/2=1.5n. Wecanalsoassumethatthemaximum 10. until inner loop has been repeated iterations times;
evacuationtimeT isproportionaltotheoccupancyvaluep. 11. T := α*T; iterations := β*iterations;
Then, we can assume that N is proportional to np and M 12.until out of time;
isalsoproportionaltonp. Thus,theaboveruntimecanbe
reduced in the followingway. (h: objective function, S: current state,
O(MlogN(M + NlogN)) NewS: new perturbation,
= O(nplognp(np+ nplognp)) random: pseudo-random number in the range [0,1],
= O(n2p2log2(np)) T: cooling temperature)
To apply SA to our contraflow problem, weconfigure the
4.2 Simulated Annealing (SA)
following factors. First, the initial state is the original net-
IfwecaninterpretthecontraflowproblemasNP-complete, work configuration for evacuation planning. Second, our
wecanfocusonfindinga”good”solutionratherthantrying perturbation is based on flipping an edge (↑↑, ↓↑ and ↓↓).
tofindanoptimalsolution. Ifweassigntheevacuationtime Third, the objective function is evacuation time. Fourth,
toagivensystemasacostfunctionorobjectivefunction,the the cooling schedule and termination condition can be con-
”goodness”ofacontraflowednetworkcanbequantitatively figured with experiment parameters. Finally, the order of
measured. Thus, if we draw a state space landscape with flipping is another random factor during simulation.
evacuation times, our problem is equivalent to the search It is known that SA is not always able to find the global
problemoffindingthelowestvalley(seeFigure6). Inother optimum,butcanfindminimumvaluesthatareclosetothe
words,wecaninterpret thecontraflow problemasa combi- global minimum. In addition, the search landscape should
natorialoptimizationproblemduetoitsNP-completechar- nothaveanoverlysteepcurve. Thatis,thewidthofvalleys
acteristic. should be approximately proportional to their depth. We
Simulated annealing (SA) is a general purpose combina- will consider these elements in the evaluation section and
torial optimization technique formulated by Kirkpatrick et examine how the contraflow search problem is suitable to
al. in 1983[18]. The SA method was created as an analogy the SA method.
toannealingprocessofliquidcoolingwiththegoalofescap- Figure7isanillustrativeexampletoshowhowtheSAcan
ingfromlocalminimaonacombinatorialsearchlandscape. behave as each edge is flipped in the graph used in Figure
Many applications have been reported to utilize SA as a 1. First two flips do not change evacuation time and draw
tool to solve large-scale combinatorial optimization prob- a plateau. A change from the third to the fourth configu-
lems, from a typical traveling salesman problem to compli- ration causes inferior movement which is allowed in the SA
cated chip layout design. algorithm. In the fifth configuration, the evacuation time
Thenewperturbationisacceptedwhenthenewobjective finally reaches the optimal state.
255

===== PAGE 8 =====

Original Evacuation Network
* Time horizon T
* Source Vertices
with Occuapncy Data Network Perturbed Network
7 11 23 * Destination Vertices Transform
Tool
47 Simulated Annealing
Time Expanded Evacuation Network
5 18 24 Flow History Minimum Cost No
12
2 8 10 FHFE C N o et n w tr o a r f k lowed F R l e o l w ax S IV olver: E T v im ac e u a a s tion Ter C m o i n n S d a a t i t i t i o i s o n f n ied?
4 13 19 O Fu b n je c c ti t o iv n e Yes
14 25 Final Evacuation Time
15 20 26
1 9 27 Figure 9: Experiment Design
3 16 21 31
46 28 45
22 38
6 17 29 39 300
30 32
34
41
33 35 40
42 250
36 43
37 44
200
Figure 8: Nuclear Power Plant Case Map
150
5. EVALUATION 100
5.1 Experiment Setup 50
We implemented and evaluated the algorithms presented
inthispaper. The languageusedwasC++ andtheexperi- 0
0 20 40 60 80 100
mentswereperformed onadual CPUPentiumIII 650MHz
workstation with 2GB of memory, running Linux. A pro-
gram representing graph structure was implemented with
Java.
Figure8showsavirtualscenarioofanuclearpowerplant
failure in Monticello, Minnesota. There are fourteen cities
around the facility and one destination shelter. The demo-
graphicdataarebasedontheCensus2000populationdata.
The total number of evacuees is about 42,000. If the given
situation is converted to a graph representation, the graph
has47verticeswith148edges. Thisdatasetseemstobetriv-
ialsizecomparedwithlargetransportationnetworkwehave
seen. However, we need to select adequate size of dataset
tohandleiterativeexperimentsofsimulatedannealing. The
interstate highway (path 2,4,15,21,45,29,33,36 and 43) has
larger capacity than other edges. The destination is vertex
40 on the bottom right corner of the map. The evacuation
time with the original network configuration is 272 min (4
hr 32 min).
WealsoimplementedanetworkgeneratorinJavatocon-
duct scalability experiments. The input file format to gen-
erate a network is similar to that of NETGEN[16] which
generates transportation network with capacity constraints
and initial supplies based on input parameters. When we
changed a network size, the proportion between the num-
ber of nodes and edges was maintained according to the
Monticello network. Edge lengths and capacity values were
randomlygeneratedwithintherangeofMonticellonetwork.
Therefore,theresultingsyntheticnetworkswereclosetoreal
networks.
Figure9describes theexperiment designtoapplyoural-
)nim(
emiT
noitaucavE
evacuation time
Percentage of Edges Contraflowed (%)
Figure 10: Evacuation Time with respect to Degree
of Contraflow using FHFE
gorithms to the Monticello nuclear power plant case. First,
the original evacuation network is given with source and
destination vertices. The network transform tool converts
theinput networkintoa timeexpanded graphwithagiven
time horizon T[12]. Second, we use RelaxIV as a minimum
cost flow solver. We can acquire flow history and evacua-
tion time from the solver. The FHFE algorithm takes the
flowhistoryasinputandgeneratesacontraflowednetwork.
In the simulated annealing algorithm, the original network
configuration is used as an initial solution. The perturbed
networkmeansanewlygeneratednetworkconfigurationby
flippinganedgeateachiterationstep. Theevacuationtime
fromRelaxIVisusedastheobjectivefunctionvaluetoassess
theperturbed network. Whentheiterativeprocess satisfies
a certain terminationcondition, it generates a final evacua-
tion time.
5.2 Flip HighFlow Edge(FHFE)
Figure 10 shows the results of applying the FHFE algo-
rithm. Thexaxisrepresentsthedegreeofcontraflowandthe
y axis indicates evacuation time. The degree of contraflow
parameter mdescribed inthealgorithmdescription section
selects the first m% of total edges. The best result is 170
minutes at 40% and 60% degree of contraflow. When the
percentage of edges contraflowed is 0%, it is equivalent to
256

===== PAGE 9 =====

7 11
23
50
47
40
5 18 24
2 12 30
8
10
4 20
13
19
14
25 10
15 20 26
1
9 27
3 16 21 31 0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000
46 28 45 17 22 29 35 38
6 39
30 32
34
41
33 40
42
36 43
37 44
Figure 11: Configuration of 20% Contraflow Degree
using FHFE
the evacuation of the given original network configuration.
We observe that there is a steep improvement at 20% of
contraflowededges. The FHFE algorithmchooses the most
promisingedgesandthencontraflowsthemfirst. Therefore,
it is natural to observe such an improvement with a small
percentage of contraflow degree. Another interesting obser-
vation is that a high percentage of contraflow degree does
notalwaysleadtobetterevacuationtime. Thismeansthat
someedgesshouldbeusedwithbothdirectionsratherthan
contraflowing them.
Figure 11 is a snapshot of network configuration when
thedegree of contraflow is20%. Wecan observethat edges
with high capacity and edges close to the destination are
contraflowed.
5.3 Simulated Annealing (SA)
Experiments were performed with three different initial
temperatures 20, 10 and 5. In all cases, the temperature
update constant α was set to 0.9. The iteration increasing
factor β was set to 1.1 and the inner loop started from 50
and the outer loop terminated at 10. For each initial tem-
perature, 30 different random seeds were applied to change
the order of flippings.
Tworandomseedsatinitialtemperature5generatedevac-
uation time 166 minutes, which is better than that of the
FHFEalgorithm. Theseresultscanbeinterpreted asbeing
close to a global minimum by escaping from several local
minimawiththehelpofthesimulatedannealingcharacter-
istic. Interestingly, the lowest initial temperature produced
thebest result,whichisnot thecasegenerallyinsimulated
annealing. Thesearchspacelandscapeofcontraflowconfig-
urationsconsistedofwideplateausandsuddenjumpsofthe
objective function. Therefore, a significant level of stochas-
tic factors prevented the experiment from configuring ap-
propriate parameters.
5.4 Scalability
Inthescalabilityexperiment,wegeneratedsynthetictrans-
portation networks with sizes proportional to the Monti-
cello case. When we increased a network size, the propor-
)emit
tinu(
emit
noitaucave
FHFE
SA
No Contraflow
number of evacuees
Figure12: EvacuationTimeWithRespectToNum-
ber of Evacuees
tionbetweentheverticesandedgescorrespondedtothatof
the Monticello case. In addition, randomly generated edge
lengthandcapacityvalueswerealsowithintherangeofthe
Monticello case. Thus, we were able to generate networks
close to a real situation. In this experiment, we wanted to
tackle two scalabilityissues.
• EffectsofNumberofEvacueesThepurposeofthis
experiment was to evaluate how the number of evac-
uees affects evacuation time. We fixed the total num-
berofverticesaswellasthenumberofsourceandsink
vertices. Onlythenumberofevacueeswasvariedfrom
5,000to70,000. Figure12presentstheresultsregard-
ing evacuation time. The evacuation time linearly in-
creasesforboththeoriginalnetworkandcontraflowed
network. Although the SA approach produced better
evacuationtimes,theFHFEalsoproducedevacuation
times close to those of the SA.
• Running Time with respect to Network SizeIn
thisexperiment,weevaluatedhowthenetworksizeaf-
fects the performance of the algorithm. The elements
including vertices, edges and the number of evacuees
changed proportionally with the number of vertices.
Figure 13 presents the results. The iterative property
ofSApreventedusfromtryingbignetworks. Onlynet-
works with vertices from 50 to 150 were tested. Our
FHFE algorithm showed almost zero run time with
small networks while the SA showed rapidly increas-
ing run time. However, FHFE also showed quadratic
run time with respect to number of vertices when we
increased the size of networks to 3000. This result
corresponds to the run time analysis of the FHFE.
6. DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss related knowledge to under-
stand our analysis of the contraflow problem. Specifically,
ourworkisrelatedtotworesearchproblems. Oneismathe-
maticalanalysisofevacuationplanning. Theotherisanaly-
sisofcombinatorialoptimization. Previousworksonmath-
ematical analysis of evacuation planning have focused on
macroscopicapproaches usingflow models[7,13]. [12]stud-
ied a discrete time dynamic network flow model with algo-
rithms for evacuation planning in general. [17] proposed a
257

===== PAGE 10 =====

25
20
15
10
5
0
50 100 150
)etunim(
emit
gninnur
FHFE SA
number of vertices
20
15
10
5
0
100 500 1000 2000 3000
)etunim(
emit
gninnur
Algorithm Evacuation Time
Original Configuration 272 min
FHFE 170 min
Simulated Annealing 166 min
Table 2: Evacuation Time Comparison on Monti-
cello Nuclear Power Plant Case
7. CONCLUSIONAND FUTUREWORK
Currentevacuationproceduresheavilydependontheuse
of surface traffic through the limited capacity of road net-
works. Fromthisperspective,contraflowbecomesoneofthe
FHFE
key solutions of evacuations on the existing transportation
infrastructure. Due to the nature of transportation net-
works, we modeled evacuation situation using graph data
structure and analyze it with flow theory. In our model,
one or more source nodes can be added, whereas existing
algorithmsonlycoverthesinglesourcesituationduetocon-
flictsofoptimalpathsfromdifferentsourcenodes. Multiple-
sources and multiple-destinations contraflow problem be-
longstoacategoryofNP-completenessproblems. Ourmain
contribution lies in the fact that our proposed approaches
number of vertices
efficientlyaddresstheNP-completecontraflowproblemwith
the cost model and experimental validations. In this paper
Figure13: RunningTimeWithRespectToNetwork
we presented two contraflow approaches and their evalua-
Size
tionswithboth realand syntheticnetworks. Hereisa brief
summary of the approaches.
• FHFE generates promising results in spite of its fast
run time. Evacuation planning software needs to be
close-to-optimal solution for evacuation planning while sig- interactive due to various combinations of input pa-
nificantlyreducingcomputationalcost. Theirfastalgorithm rameters (e.g., daytime v.s. night time population)
canbecombinedwithoursinthefuturework. NETFLO[15] andchangingdatasets(e.g.,constructionzone). Thus,
and Relax4[1] are famous solvers for linear minimum-cost running time is a critical factor when we implement
flow problems. Especially, Relax4 contributed to the con- planning software for clients. A well designed heuris-
struction of our algorithms by quickly calculating the evac- tic algorithm that is tailored to contraflow problems
uation time of a given network using dual ascent methods has some advantages over general iterative methods.
and auction algorithm. The number of contraflowed edges is adjustable. The
To utilize general combinatorial optimization heuristics scalability of FHFE is superior to that of the SA ap-
tosolveaspecificproblemrequires muchexperience. Thus, proach.
it is necessary to read various applications in the domain.
• Simulated Annealing reveals the possibility of the
[18] formulated a class of adaptive heuristics for combina-
existence of a global minimum. In addition, the ap-
torial optimization including probabilistic hill-climbing and
plication of SA to the contraflow problem has never
simulated annealing. [8] provides a broad overview of NP-
beenobservedinoptimizationresearcharea. Selecting
completeproblemsandtheirproofs. [3]studiedtheapplica-
theappropriateperturbationandparametervaluesfor
tionofsimulatedannealingtothedrawingofgraphsnicely.
experiments is of critical importance in simulated an-
The paper gave valuable information from their trial and
nealing.
error. [10, 11] presented a broad overview in the domain of
annealing. Ourworkappliestheinsightsfromtheseprevious Table2summarizestheevacuationtimeofourapproaches
studies to solve contraflow problem using general combina- for the Monticello case. We can observe that both ap-
torial techniques. proaches significantly reduce evacuation time and that the
With the discussion of related knowledge, it is worth ex- FHFE can generate a contraflow networkwhose evacuation
ploring possible solutions of contraflow problem. General time is competitive withthat of the SA.
search algorithms such as A* have difficulty in defining the Eventhoughcontraflowoperationonurbanarterialroad-
goal state of contraflow problem because the optimal net- waysandlongsectionsofinterstatefreewaysforevacuations
workconfigurations leadingtominimalevacuation timeex- is accompanied by complicated issues of safety, accessibil-
istinasetofcombinatorialpossibilitieswithunknownmin- ity and cost, our proposed algorithms for simplified situa-
imal evacuation time. Dynamic programming algorithms tions would be considerably helpful to planners designing
such as branch and bound approach cannot be applied be- contraflow plans because the objective of our research is to
causecontraflowproblemdoesnotguaranteesub-optimality minimizeevacuationtime,whichisanessentialpartofplan-
betweenthegivenstageanditssub-problems. Generalsearch ning.
techniquessuchashillclimbingcanimprovethegivenstate, More in-depth research is required for contraflow algo-
but mostlylead to the local minima. rithms. First, other possible methods should be examined.
258

===== PAGE 11 =====

Forexample,wecanflipapathinsteadofanedge. Second, [8] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. Computers and
in-bound traffic demand should be considered. Emergency Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP
vehicles for traffic officers or fire fighters should have pre- Completeness. Freeman, 1979.
empted network capacity. Third, partial lane reversal and [9] R. Greiner. Probabilistichill-climbing: Theory and
capacity varying edge need to be incorporated in the mod- applications. Proceedings of the Ninth Canadian
eling. Finally, a more extensive parameter set of simulated Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 60–67,
annealing needs to be tested for in-depth knowledge of its 1992.
applicabilityto contraflow problems. [10] B. Hajek. A tutorialsurvey of theory and applications
of simulatedannealing. 24th IEEE Conference on
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Decision and Control, pages 755–760,1985.
We are particularly grateful to members of the Spatial [11] B. Hajek. Cooling schedules for optimal annealing.
DatabaseResearchGroupattheUniversityofMinnesotafor Mathematics of Operations Research, 13(2):311–329,
theirhelpfulcommentsandvaluablediscussions. Especially, 1988.
ourevacuationresearchmembersincludingQingsongLuand [12] H. W. Hamacher and S. A. Tjandra. Mathematical
BetsyGeorgegaveusvaluablecomments. KimberlyKoffolt modeling of evacuation problems: State of the art.
increasedthereadabilityofourpaperbyproofreadingit. We Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics, pages 227–266,
arealsothankful foruseof theprogramRelaxIVdeveloped 2001.
by the CRIFOR research group. [13] H. W. Hamacher and S. Tufekci. On the use of
Thisworkissupportedbyagrant(contractnumber81655) lexicographic min cost flows in evacuation modeling.
from the Minnesota Department of Transportation. Naval Research Logistics, 34:487–503,1987.
[14] G. Hamza-Lup, K. A. Hua, M. Le, and R. Peng.
9. REFERENCES Enhancing intelligent transportationsystems to
improveand support homeland security. In In Proc. of
[1] D. Bertsekas and P. Tseng. Relax-iv: A faster version
IEEE International Conference on Intelligent
of the relax code for solving minimum cost flow
Transportation Systems, 2004.
problems. In LIDS(Laboratory for Information and
[15] J. L. Kennington and R. V. Helgason. Algorithm for
Decision Systems)-P-2276. M.I.T., Cambridge, MA,
Network Programming. Wiley and Sons, 1980.
1994.
[16] D. Klingman. A program for generating largescale
[2] B. V. Cherkassky, A. V. Goldberg, and T. Radzik.
capacited assignment,transportation, and minimum
Shortest paths algorithms: theory and experimental
cost flow network problems. In Management Science,
evaluation. In SODA(Symposium on Discrete
pages 20:814–822,1974.
Algorithms) ’94: Proceedings of the fifth annual
[17] Q. Lu, Y. Huang, and S. Shekhar. Evacuation
ACM-SIAM(Society for Industrial and Applied
planning: A capacity constrained routing approach.
Mathematics) symposium on Discrete algorithms,
ISI(International Symposium on Isotopomers) 2003,
pages 516–525. Society for Industrial and Applied
pages 111–125,2003.
Mathematics, 1994.
[18] S. Nahar, S. Sahni, and E. Shragowitz. Simulated
[3] R. Davidson and D. Harel. Drawing graphs nicely
annealing and combinatorial optimization.In 23rd
using simulatedannealing. ACM Transactions on
IEEE Design Automation Conference, pages 293–299,
Graphics, 15(4):301–331,October 1996.
1986.
[4] J. G. Doheny and J. L. Fraser. Mobedic - a decision
[19] J. Orlin. A faster stronglypolynomial minimum cost
modeling tool for emergency situations.Expert
flow algorithm. In STOC ’88: Proceedings of the
Systems With Applications, 10:17–27,1996.
twentieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
[5] M. Ebihara, A. Ohtsuki, and H. Iwaki. A model for
computing, pages 377–387.ACM Press, 1988.
simulating human behavior during emergency
[20] G. Theodoulou. Contraflow evacuation on the
evacuation based on classificatoryreasoning and
westbound i-10 out of the city of New Orleans.
certainty value handling. Microcomputers in Civil
Master’s thesis, Louisiana State University, 2003.
Engineering, 7:63–71,1992.
[21] B. Wolshon. One-way-out: Contraflow freeway
[6] G. Ford, R. Henk, and P. Barricklow.Interstate
operation for hurricane evacuation. Natural Hazards
highway 37 reverse flow analysis - technical
Review,2(3):105–112,2001.
memorandum. Technical report, Texas Transportation
Institute, 2000. [22] B. Wolshon, E. Urbina, and M. Levitan. National
review of hurricane evacuation plans and policies.
[7] L. R. Ford and D. R. Fulkerson. Flows in Network.
Technical report, LSU Hurricane Center, Louisiana
Princeton University Press, 1962.
State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 2002.
259
